
===== PDF page index 91 (rulebook p.91) =====

===== PDF page index 92 (rulebook p.92) =====

===== PDF page index 93 (rulebook p.93) =====
82 
Call of Cthulhu
his chapter details the Call of Cthulhu  game 
rules that are used to ensure fairness and 
balance, as well as to resolve conflicts and 
challenges as they arise in play. 
When to Roll Dice
There is a large amount of fun to be had playing a roleplaying 
game, and much of it is derived from discussing your 
character’s actions with your fellow players (and the Keeper) 
without rolling any dice whatsoever. Players declare what 
their investigators are doing and often speak "in character" 
to better express themselves. The Keeper states what the 
non-player characters (NPCs) are doing, and describes the 
world around the investigators. So far so good. Everyone 
accepts what everyone else says and builds upon it to create 
an interesting story. Until, of course, they don’t accept what 
someone else is saying. For example, an investigator doesn’t 
believe what Old Man Marsh (played by the Keeper) is saying 
about the whereabouts of the missing library books. When 
someone says something that you don’t like, you can ask 
for clarification or you can disagree—but ultimately, if you 
don’t accept what someone says about what’s happening in 
the story, the situation can be resolved with dice. Likewise, 
you could simply say that your investigator managed to 
climb to the top of the church steeple in the pouring rain 
at midnight—however if there’s no dice roll to test your 
investigator’s skill, there’s no tension or drama either!
Equally there’s no need to roll dice for everything. For 
example, each investigator has a Drive Auto skill, but dice 
don’t need to be rolled every time an investigator gets in a 
car—that would be just dull! If you say your investigator is 
driving to the local historical society, unless someone takes 
issue with you, then it’s done. Simply move on with the story. 
Normal day-to-day stuff that everyone "just does" should be 
just that—no dice needed.
However, if the Keeper describes a car full of cultists 
attempting to push the investigator’s car off the road, the 
player may object to this. The player could say, “Hold on, I’m 
putting my foot down and getting away, ” but still the Keeper 
may insist the cultists are barging the investigator’s car off the 
road. There’s a disagreement, a conflict—a reason to roll dice 
and see whether the investigator’s car is indeed pushed into 
the ditch. The story has reached a moment of tension that 
requires a definite outcome. Time to reach for the dice!
Skill Rolls
The word "roll" is used in conjunction with the appropriate 
skill or characteristic; thus the Keeper will, for example, call 
for a "Climb roll" or a "Strength roll".
The Keeper has the final say about which skill or 
characteristic is appropriate to roll, depending on the 
situation and the nature of the opposition. The term "skill 
roll" is used regardless of whether a skill or a characteristic 
is used.
The player should be clear about what they want to 
achieve by stating a goal before rolling any dice. If the 
goal isn’t acceptable, the Keeper should help the player to 
rephrase it. The goal should define the player’s objective 
clearly and concisely. For advice on setting goals see Chapter 
10: Playing the Game.
Skill Roll:  
Determining the Difficulty Level
The Keeper determines the difficulty level for skill rolls. 
There are three levels of difficulty in Call of Cthulhu: Regular, 
Hard, and Extreme. 
Regular difficulty level: an average example of what would 
challenge a competent person. The player needs to roll equal 
to or below their full skill or characteristic in order to suc -
ceed. This should be used in the vast majority of cases.
Hard difficulty level: this task would challenge a profession-
al. The player needs to roll equal to or below a half of their 
skill or characteristic in order to succeed. This should only 
be used occasionally.
The Keeper’s 
Decision is Final
While the Call of Cthulhu 
rules are designed to be as 
clear and flexible as possible, 
from time to time you may 
encounter a situation in the 
game for which the rules 
do not provide a solution. 
In such circumstances the 
Keeper’s decision is final. 
Players are encouraged to 
offer suggestions and ideas, 
however the players should 
respect the Keeper’s decision 
and move on with the game.
Harvey Walters wants to force a door open. The Keeper 
might assume that he is simply bashing the door and 
creating a loud noise in the process. If Harvey wants 
to open the door quietly, he needs to state this as his 
goal. Thus ‘break the door down’ and ‘lever the door 
open quietly’ are two different goals, and the Keeper 
will consider the complexity of the goal when setting 
a difficulty level.

===== PDF page index 94 (rulebook p.94) =====
83 
chapter 5: game system
Extreme difficulty level:  this task would challenge an ex -
pert; it is on the border of what is humanly possible. The 
player needs to roll equal to or below a fifth of their skill or 
characteristic in order to succeed. This should be reserved 
for extreme situations.
If you, as Keeper, feel that the task is easy then don’t ask 
for a dice roll. Save dice rolls for challenging situations.
If the investigator is facing a living being, the difficulty 
level should be set according to the complementary skill or 
characteristic belonging to that being (human or otherwise). 
It is up to the Keeper to decide which skill or characteristic 
would be used by the opponent to counter the investigator’s 
actions—examples can be found with each skill entry (see 
Chapter 4: Skills).
i If the opponent’s skill or characteristic is below 50, 
the difficulty level is Regular.
i If the opponent’s skill or characteristic is equal to or 
above 50, the difficulty level is Hard. 
i If the opponent’s skill or characteristic is equal to or 
above 90, the difficulty level is Extreme. 
In the case of non-living opponents, the Keeper must 
act as judge, weighing up the pertinent factors. A standard 
challenge would be of Regular difficulty. Where the challenge 
is clearly beyond Regular difficulty, the Keeper may use the 
Hard difficulty level. If the challenge is exceptionally difficult 
but still within the bounds of what is humanly possible, the 
Keeper should use the Extreme difficulty level. 
Wherever possible, the situation should be framed in such a 
way that the dice are being rolled by the player. Players won’t get 
much fun out of watching the Keeper roll the dice every time. If 
the investigator is attempting to use their Stealth skill to furtively 
follow a non-player character, the player would roll the dice and 
the Keeper would use the non-player character’s Spot Hidden 
skill to set the difficulty level. If the situation were reversed 
and the non-player character were following the investigator, 
the player would roll the dice against their Spot Hidden skill 
to see if the tail is spotted, but this time Keeper would use the 
non-player character’s Stealth skill to set the difficulty level. 
Remember, the players should 
be rolling the dice more often 
than the Keeper.
See Chapter 10: Playing 
the Game  for more advice 
on setting difficulty levels.
Rolling the Dice: 
Success or 
Failure
There are two possible outcomes 
of a roll: success or failure. The various divisions of skill (fifth, 
half, full) do not equate with graduations of success. The player 
states a goal and then rolls the dice. If the dice roll is equal to or 
below the required number, the goal is fully achieved. If the dice 
roll is below a half or a fifth of the specified skill, the goal will 
not necessarily be performed to a higher standard. Any further 
interpretation of the roll is at the discretion of the Keeper.
Success
If the player has rolled equal to or under the target set by the 
Keeper, their investigator has achieved the goal that was set 
and agreed before the roll. The player should be encouraged 
to participate in describing the outcome. This can include 
aspects of the story beyond his or her investigator, such as 
the actions of non-player characters and the environment; 
however, such things may be moderated by the Keeper. 
Thus both player and Keeper are involved in describing the 
outcome of a successful roll.
Harvey Walters is trying to persuade the librarian to 
allow him access to the library on a Sunday, when the 
library is normally closed. The Keeper considers the 
librarian’s Persuade and Psychology skills (the two 
skills which are used to oppose Persuade). Neither 
of these is above 50% and so the difficulty level is 
Regular, requiring Harvey’s player to roll equal to or 
below Harvey’s full Persuade skill in order to succeed. 
 Harvey failed to persuade the librarian to open 
up, so he has decided to force open the back door 
of the library. Harvey has a STR of 20. The library 
door is made of thick oak, with a stout iron lock, and 
the Keeper judges it to be particularly strong. The 
difficulty level is thus set to Hard, requiring Harvey 
to roll 10 or below (half Harvey’s STR).
Remember, only roll the 
dice if it’s a moment of 
tension. Dice rolls are not 
needed when characters 
undertake mundane and 
everyday tasks.
"Sorry, the library is closed!"
===== PDF page index 95 (rulebook p.95) =====
84 
Call of Cthulhu
Failure
The player stated a goal and has failed to achieve it, but exactly 
how the player’s investigator has failed is entirely up to the 
Keeper (though of course the players may throw in suggestions). 
Initial failure at a skill roll should not usually inflict damage or 
Sanity loss, but this depends on the circumstances. A failed 
roll could represent failure to act rather than a failed attempt. 
Worse things may happen if the player chooses to push the roll 
and fails a second time (see Pushing the Roll). Save "what’s the 
worst that could happen?" style consequences for pushed rolls.
Pushing the Roll
...the essence of pure nightmare was upon me. Sanity 
departed—and, ignoring everything except the animal impulse 
of flight, I merely struggled and plunged upward over the 
incline’s debris as if no gulf had existed. Then I saw the chasm’s 
edge, leaped frenziedly with every ounce of strength I possessed, 
and was instantly engulfed in a pandaemoniac vortex of 
loathsome sound and utter, materially tangible blackness.
—H.P . Lovecraft, The Shadow Out Of Time
Pushing a skill roll provides the player with a second and 
final attempt to achieve a goal. A pushed roll is only allowed 
if it can be justified, and it is up to the player to do this. 
Whenever a player asks, “Can I push the roll?” the Keeper 
should always ask, “What action are you taking to push the 
situation?” It is not for the Keeper to simply say yes or no; it 
is for the player to describe the extra effort or time taken to 
justify the pushed roll. If the player is stuck, other players or 
the Keeper might offer suggestions. 
By making a pushed roll, the player is upping the ante 
and giving the Keeper permission to bring dire consequences 
should the roll be failed a second time. Pushing a roll means 
pushing the situation to the limit: 
T If you are breaking down a door, it may mean throw-
ing yourself at it with no heed for your own safety.
T If you are persuading a police officer, it may mean 
risking arrest.
Harvey drives his car directly at a shambling human-
like monster with the goal of hitting it. The Keeper 
declares that the difficulty level to hit it will be hard 
(given it has a Dodge skill of 60). The player rolls less 
than half of her investigator’s Drive Auto skill—a suc-
cess! The player describes the scene...
“I push down the accelerator and ram into the 
shambling thing, knocking it flying. I brake hard, spin 
the car to a halt and jump out, leaving the engine 
running. I draw my pistol and fire three shots into the 
monster’s corpse. ”
There’s no need to take issue with the player’s 
description of Harvey’s cool driving technique—it is 
just description—but did he really kill the monster? 
The Keeper checks the monster’s hit points and 
considers that it would take more than this to kill it. 
The player’s goal was to hit the monster with the car 
(which she did), not to kill it. The Keeper jumps in, 
slightly altering what the player has said...
“Great, but when you get out of your car and look 
around there’s no sign of a body; the thing you hit 
with your car is nowhere to be seen. ”
Alternatively, the Keeper (referring to Other 
Forms of Damage on page 123) could ask the player 
to roll dice to see exactly how much damage the car 
did to the monster. Determining that the monster is 
definitely not dead yet, the Keeper amends the latter 
part of what the player said...
“ As you reach for your pistol, you see the shambling 
thing emerge from the foliage. It looks undamaged 
and very, very angry. ”
Harvey fails his Climb skill roll as he attempts to de-
scend from an upper floor window to the street below. 
The Keeper describes the lack of handholds and that 
the nearby drainpipe feels loose. Harvey’s goal was 
to get safely to the ground, and this has not been 
achieved—Harvey is still stuck where he was before 
the dice roll. Note how the Keeper did not take the 
situation to its extreme, that of Harvey falling and 
suffering harm, as it made sense that Harvey would 
hesitate when he realized the danger.
Harvey speeds towards the monster.
===== PDF page index 96 (rulebook p.96) =====
85 
chapter 5: game system
T If you are searching a room, it may mean turning 
it over and risking breaking things, or spending 
too long there when you know the bad guys might 
return at any moment.
T If you are trying to read someone with Psychology, 
it may mean studying a person that little bit too 
closely, or asking some very prying questions.
T If you are picking a lock, it may mean using a little 
too much force. Something may break, but what will 
it be? The lock or your lock picks?
T If it involves Cthulhu Mythos, you may risk staring 
into the abyss of dark knowledge for so long that 
something looks back at you.
T If you are climbing a wall, it may mean continuing 
even though it feels completely unsafe.
T If you are reading a tome, it may mean obsessing 
over every page, reading and rereading obsessively 
until you can correlate the contents.
It is important to note that a pushed roll is not simply a 
re-roll; time always passes between rolls—it may be seconds 
or hours. 
When making a pushed roll, the goal must still be 
achievable. The skill and difficulty level normally remain 
unchanged, but may be modified if the situation changes.
Only skill and characteristic rolls can be pushed, not 
Luck, Sanity, or combat rolls, or rolls to determine an 
amount of damage or Sanity loss.
Foreshadowing Failure
So haunting were these formulae, and so frequently did he 
come upon them, that before the doctor knew it he was  
repeating them under his breath.
—H. P . Lovecraft, The Case Of Charles Dexter Ward
Before rolling the dice for a pushed roll, the consequence of 
failure may be foreshadowed by the Keeper. To foreshadow, 
the Keeper says, “If you fail… ” followed by as much detail 
as he or she desires. The Keeper should highlight things 
that would be apparent to the investigator (though perhaps 
unconsidered by the player). Things that the investigator 
would not be aware of might only be hinted at (at the 
Keeper’s discretion). Players are welcome to offer their own 
suggestions for consequences, especially when they come up 
with scarier ones!
There are two reasons why the Keeper should foreshadow 
the consequence:
i The player requests foreshadowing to clarify the 
dangers (as the investigator would be aware of 
them), so that they can gauge the risk.
i The Keeper chooses to foreshadow to highlight the 
danger or to increase the drama of the situation.
It is imperative that the Keeper focuses on an interesting 
consequence, rather than flat failure. 
More advice on foreshadowing is offered in Chapter 10: 
Playing the Game. 
Harvey is fleeing from pursuing cultists. His player 
declares that Harvey is trying to hide behind a mar-
ket stall positioned in the main street. The Keeper 
determines that this requires a Stealth roll at Regular 
difficulty. Harvey’s player rolls high and fails the roll. 
The Keeper describes the stall as being little more 
than a few boxes on the pavement, with nowhere 
to hide behind. Believing it’s only a matter of time 
before he is caught, Harvey decides to try to hide in 
plain sight, among the passing crowds, hoping that 
the cultists won’t see him in the throng of people. 
The Keeper approves this for a pushed roll. Harvey is 
taking a bigger risk—he’s effectively making himself 
easier to spot, and so will have no chance of escape if 
the pushed roll is failed.
Harvey’s player makes a second Stealth roll, this 
time succeeding! Harvey’s quick thinking means that 
he melts away into the crowd. The cultists have lost 
him this time!
"Run! Run for your life!"
===== PDF page index 97 (rulebook p.97) =====
86 
Call of Cthulhu
Pushed Roll: Success
The player’s goal is achieved as it would have been for the 
original roll. None of the consequences of failure happen.
Pushed Roll: Failure
Failing a pushed roll grants the Keeper free rein over the 
outcome, including damage, Sanity checks, loss of equipment, 
isolation from the rest of the investigators, capture, and so 
on. The Keeper can even incorporate the player’s goal being 
achieved (even though the player failed the pushed roll), but 
at some form of cost. 
When a player fails a pushed roll, he or she is giving the 
Keeper license to make the investigators’ lives more difficult. 
A consequence should steer the game towards the theme 
of horror, taking the investigators one step nearer to their 
doom. A player gets to push a skill roll and, if he or she fails, 
the Keeper gets to push the horror back in that player’s face.
Failed Dice Rolls and Sudden Endings
Where possible try to avoid an outcome that will end the 
game (unless you wish to, of course). Try to be creative and 
describe an outcome that allows for play to proceed, but not 
in the way the players intended. Rather than sudden death, 
consider other options such as:
i A setback: a loss of equipment or the death of an ally.
i The investigator is taken captive rather than killed.
i A deal: rather than killing the investigator, the ene -
my offers a pact or deal.
i Fainting: it is perfectly Lovecraftian for a character 
to faint, only to awaken later to find themselves 
unharmed and the situation changed.
More Than One Player Rolling Dice 
for a Skill Roll?
In some circumstances two or more characters may work 
together towards the same goal. The decision of how many 
investigators may be involved in a particular situation is up 
to the Keeper. 
 In the previous example, instead of succeeding in the 
pushed Stealth roll let's say Harvey failed it. The Keeper 
now has license to make matters far worse for Harvey.
“ As Harvey tries to blend into the crowd, he finds 
himself jostled as he goes against the flow of people. He 
is pushed against a market stall, knocking it and himself 
over (Harvey takes 1 point of damage). As Harvey falls 
to the pavement, fruit falling on his head, the sudden 
noise of his cry makes the crowd part around him. 
He looks up to see everyone staring at him, including 
the cultists who were in pursuit. They quickly shout 
out, “He’s our friend!” as they come forward and grab 
Harvey. The crowd of people seem satisfied, and no one 
notices the dagger that one the cultists is now holding 
to Harvey’s ribs as they manhandle him into an alley. 
Harvey is fleeing through underground tunnels, pur-
sued by ghouls. He sees an abyss before him. Perhaps 
he can leap across to the other side. He fails his Jump 
roll. There is really nothing he can do to push this 
roll. The Keeper could simply describe Harvey falling 
to his death, which would end the game for Harvey’s 
player. Alternatively, the Keeper could describe how 
Harvey falls and lands in an underground river, later 
to be washed up, injured and lost at an unknown 
location, his flashlight and equipment lost. The first 
outcome will bring the game to a sudden end and, 
while this may be acceptable, the second allows for 
the game to continue.
Using the previous example, Harvey’s player has de-
clared she would like to try to push the failed Stealth 
roll and described what Harvey is doing to justify this. 
The player then asks the Keeper for the likely conse-
quence if the pushed roll is failed. The Keeper thinks 
for a moment and says, “Well, as Harvey is trying to 
mingle with the crowd of people in the street—if the 
pushed roll is failed he could well find himself bump-
ing into one of the pursuing cultists and be caught. ”
Between a rock and a hard place!
===== PDF page index 98 (rulebook p.98) =====
87 
chapter 5: game system

===== PDF page index 99 (rulebook p.99) =====
88 
Call of Cthulhu
Examples include:
i Researching a single book: one person at a time may 
read the book.
i Picking a lock: one person may attempt to pick the 
lock, rolling their Locksmith skill.
i Delivering First Aid: two people may assist each 
other, both rolling their First Aid skill. A success is 
granted if either of them succeeds. 
i Carrying a body: the Keeper should use the SIZ 
characteristic of the body to set the difficulty level. 
Up to four people, each taking one limb, could assist 
one another in carrying a body, in which case a roll 
would only be required if the body were exception -
ally heavy (see Physical Human Limits for guidance 
on combining physical characteristics).
i Library Use in a public library: all investigators in 
the library may conduct research and attempt a skill 
roll. Only one successful roll is required.
i Spotting a clue: everyone who is in the right position 
to view whatever is in question may roll Spot Hid -
den. Only one successful roll is required.
i Determining if someone is withholding information: 
everyone who is able to observe the subject may roll 
Psychology. Only one successful roll is required.
i Sneaking past a guard: Everyone needs to roll their 
Stealth skill; if one person fails, the guard will be 
alerted to their presence.
The examples above are intended only as guidelines. For 
tasks in which the number of participants is limited, further 
attempts may be made by other investigators, but such 
attempts will take additional time.
It may not be apparent in some situations whether 
another skill roll should be allowed or if a player is required 
to push a skill roll; the Keeper must decide. In general, when 
an investigator is attempting the same goal a second time, 
this requires a pushed roll.
Physical Human Limits
The investigators are only human, and there are limits to 
what they can achieve physically. As has already been stated, 
the difficulty level of a roll is Extreme when opposed by a 
characteristic of 90 or above. The upper limit of what can be 
faced with an Extreme success is 100 + the investigator’s skill 
or characteristic. Anything beyond this is impossible for 
that character, and no dice roll is allowed. Thus no human 
can win a test of STR versus a large monster such as a Dark 
Y oung (STR 220).
The only way to exceed human limits is for multiple 
investigators to combine their efforts. One or more 
investigators’ characteristics are deducted from the 
opponent’s characteristic to reduce it to a level against which 
other investigators may make a skill roll. To do this, starting 
Cecil’s fellow investigator, Rodger, is trapped beneath 
a fallen rafter. The Keeper rules that the rafter has 
a SIZ of 150. Cecil’s STR is only 40, which is more 
than 100 below the rafter’s SIZ, making it impossible 
for him to lift it on his own, according to the rule on 
physical human limits.
Luckily, Martin (STR 45) is there to help. Cecil’s 
STR is lowest, so it is subtracted first from the rafter’s 
SIZ, leaving the rafter’s SIZ at 110 (150–40). This 
is over 90, but less than 100 points above Martin’s 
STR, so he can attempt a skill roll to move the rafter, 
requiring an Extreme success. Martin fails this roll.
Cecil has STR 40; the most he can attempt to lift  
is SIZ 140.
Martin has STR 45; the most he can attempt to 
lift is SIZ 145.
At that moment the rest of the group arrive. There 
are now five investigators attempting to lift the rafter: 
Cecil (STR 40), Harvey (STR 20), Martin (STR 45), 
Helen (STR 60) and Belinda (STR 75). 
Harvey has STR 20; the most he can attempt to 
lift is SIZ 120.
Helen has STR 60; the most she can attempt to 
lift is SIZ 160.
Belinda has STR 75; the most she can attempt to 
lift is SIZ 175.
Subtracting Harvey’s STR from the rafter leaves 
SIZ 130; deducting Cecil’s STR then leaves SIZ 90; 
finally, subtracting Martin’s STR leaves SIZ 45. This 
has reduced the difficulty level to Regular. The Keeper 
rules that they can all lay hands on the rafter and 
attempt the lift, but since one attempt has already 
been made, that this will constitute a pushed skill roll. 
Neither Helen’s nor Belinda’s STRs have been factored 
in yet, so they are both able to attempt the pushed 
skill roll to lift the rafter. Helen rolls a success, Belinda 
rolls a failure. One success was all that was needed. 
Rodger is freed.
The Keeper allows two investigators to administer First 
Aid to a fallen comrade. Each player rolls dice; if  both 
fail the skill roll, they may either continue with their 
efforts (pushing the roll) or they can move aside and 
allow other investigators to attempt it (up to two at a 
time). Each attempt to administer first aid takes time, 
and this may be crucial if the patient is at death’s door.
Another example: The players wish to interrogate 
a cultist, and decide to use the classic good cop, bad 
cop routine. One player uses Intimidate  and another 
uses Charm. They take it in turns to play their roles, 
each rolling dice to test if the cultist cracks. Once the 
investigators have each made one dice roll, they must 
either give up, or one of them must push the roll. 
===== PDF page index 100 (rulebook p.100) =====
89 
chapter 5: game system
with the lowest, deduct each investigator’s characteristic 
value in turn from the opposition’s characteristic. Continue 
doing this until the opponent’s characteristic has been 
reduced to a value that can be challenged by an investigator. 
Investigators whose characteristics were not used to reduce 
the opposing factor may now make a skill roll, with an 
Extreme, Hard, or Regular difficulty level, as determined by 
the new value of the opposing characteristic. 
This rule is only generally applicable to physical 
challenges in which characters can use their shared Strength 
or Size to achieve a task. The opposition cannot be reduced 
to zero or lower by this method; a skill roll is always required.
Fumbles and Criticals
I have said that Danforth refused to tell me what final horror 
made him scream out so insanely—a horror which, I feel 
sadly sure, is mainly responsible for his present breakdown.
—H.P . Lovecraft, At The Mountains Of Madness
Very high or very low dice rolls are unusual, and signify 
good or bad fortune for the players.
The impact of Fumbles should take effect immediately 
and may not be negated through pushing the roll.
01: A Critical Success
A roll of 01 means that something beneficial occurs beyond 
simply achieving the goal. The nature of the good fortune is 
at the Keeper’s discretion, although the players may make 
suggestions. In combat, for example, a critical success 
means that the attacker has hit a vulnerable spot and causes 
maximum damage.
96—100: Fumble
A fumble simply means that something really bad occurs—
something worse than a straight failure. The nature of the 
misfortune or bad luck is at the Keeper’s discretion. 
Brian is attempting to appraise an unusual gold 
crown, and rolls 01 with his Appraise skill of 35%. 
The Keeper tells Brian that not only is he able to 
determine an accurate monetary value for the crown 
(the normal outcome for a Regular success), he also 
identifies that the crown is from the South Seas, pos-
sibly one of the fabled items brought back by Captain 
Marsh in the 1830s (as a result of the critical success).
"We'll get you out of there, Rodger"
===== PDF page index 101 (rulebook p.101) =====
90 
Call of Cthulhu
If the dice roll required for success is 50 or over and the 
dice read 100, a fumble has occurred.
If the dice roll required for success is below 50 and the 
dice read 96—100, a fumble has occurred.
Luck
Luck rolls may be called for by the Keeper when 
circumstances external to any investigator are in question, 
and also when determining the fickle hand of fate. If a skill 
or characteristic is applicable to a situation then it should be 
used rather than Luck. 
If the Keeper calls for a Group Luck roll, the player whose 
investigator has the lowest Luck score (among those present 
in the scene) should make the roll.
If something bad is deemed to happen to one member 
of the group, the Keeper can simply ask who has the lowest 
Luck score at that moment and have that individual suffer 
the unfortunate event.
Y ou will also find an optional rule for spending Luck 
points to alter dice rolls at the end of this chapter.
Intelligence Rolls and Idea Rolls
An Intelligence (INT) roll may be called for by the Keeper 
when an investigator is attempting to solve an intellectual 
puzzle of some kind. By rolling equal to or below the 
investigator’s Intelligence, the player will receive a solution 
from the Keeper. This might include solving a crossword 
puzzle or answering a riddle.
An Idea roll is different to an Intelligence roll, although 
made in the same manner by rolling equal to or below the 
investigator’s Intelligence characteristic. An Idea roll is usually 
proposed by the players when their investigators have become 
stuck at a point in the investigation; perhaps they have 
completely missed a vital clue, or just don’t know what to do 
next, and so the game has stalled. The outcome of the Idea roll 
will get the investigation back on track; however, the success 
or failure of the Idea roll determines whether the missed clue 
has been obtained easily, or at some cost to the investigators 
(see Chapter 10 for more advice about Idea rolls). 
Know Roll
All people know bits of information about different topics. 
The Know roll represents what’s stored in the brain’s 
intellectual attic, calculated as the percentage chance that 
the investigator’s education supplied the information. Roll 
equal to or under a character’s EDU value to determine the 
success of a Know roll.
The investigator might know it is dangerous to pour 
water into sulfuric acid (without studying Chemistry), 
or be able to remember the geography of Tibet (without a 
Navigate roll), or know how many legs arachnids have (and 
possess only one percentile of Biology).
Identification of present-day earthly languages is an 
excellent use for the Know roll. If a specific skill is more 
applicable to the situation, then it should be used rather than 
making a Know roll (at the Keeper’s discretion).
Opposed Skill Rolls:  
Player versus Player  
and Melee Combat
There may be times, such as when two investigators are 
opposing one another, when you wish for both sides to roll 
dice to determine a victor. Opposed rolls are the standard for 
melee combat (see Chapter 6: Combat). Outside of combat, 
the Keeper should avoid using opposed rolls between non-
player characters and investigators. However once a Keeper 
is accustomed to these rules, he or she may wish to use an 
opposed roll where they feel it will enhance the drama.
To make an opposed roll, both sides declare a mutually 
exclusive goal: one will win, the other will lose. Each side 
selects a skill or a characteristic to use —not necessarily the 
same one—both of which must be approved by the Keeper. 
Both sides roll dice to determine a level of success by 
comparing their rolls with their chosen skill or characteristic. 
The Keeper should be aware that characteristics are usually 
higher than skills, so where one side uses a characteristic the 
other side should be given the choice of whether to use a 
characteristic or a skill.
Opposed skill rolls cannot be pushed.
Brian encounters a ghoul. Making his Sanity roll 
he rolls 100—a fumble. He automatically takes the 
maximum Sanity point loss for seeing the ghoul.
Another example: Harvey has 55% Library Use 
skill. If he were searching the library for clues, the 
Keeper might ask for a Library Use roll. Given that 
his skill is 55%, he will only fumble on a roll of 100. 
If Harvey were furtively searching through a private 
library in the dark, with only a candle for light, 
the Keeper might set the difficulty level to Hard, 
requiring a roll of 27. In this case, Harvey would 
fumble on a roll of 96 to 100.
 Finding a cab doesn’t require a dice roll, but getting 
one before the investigators lose sight of the car that 
they wish to pursue could. Credit Rating could be a 
factor in attracting the attention of a cabdriver on the 
lookout for a well-dressed fare who may tip gener -
ously. However, quickly getting a ride at two o’ clock 
in the morning on the undesirable side of town might 
not be so easy. Would there even be a cab to hail? No 
skill is going to make a cab appear at that moment. 
It is a matter of chance whether a cab may be driving 
down that road, hence a Luck roll is required.
===== PDF page index 102 (rulebook p.102) =====
91 
chapter 5: game system
A skill roll can yield one of six results:
Fumble: the roll is 100. If the roll required for success is less 
than 50, a roll of 96 or over is a fumble.
Failure: the roll is above the character’s skill or characteristic 
(but not a fumble).
Regular success: the roll is equal to or below the character’s 
skill or characteristic.
Hard success: the roll is equal to or below a half of the char-
acter’s skill or characteristic.
Extreme success: the roll is equal to or below a fifth of the 
character’s skill or characteristic.
Critical success: a roll of 01.
Comparing Results:
A Critical success beats an Extreme success.
An Extreme success beats a Hard success.
A Hard success beats a Regular success.
A Regular success beats a Failure or Fumble.
In the case of a tie, the side with the higher skill (or 
characteristic) wins. If still tied, either an impasse has been 
reached or both sides should re-roll.
Bonus Dice and Penalty Dice              
(Primarily for Use with Opposed Dice Rolls)
Sometimes the prevailing conditions, environment, and 
available time can hinder or benefit a skill or characteristic 
roll. Certain conditions mean that the Keeper may grant a 
bonus die or a penalty die to a roll. 
Bonus dice and penalty dice are not trifling small additions 
or subtractions of a few percentage points, and so should 
not be used without good cause. If a factor is so small that it 
would only modify a roll by a few percentage points then don’t 
bother with it. Driving in light rain should not inflict a penalty 
die, but racing against another driver in heavy torrential rain 
(opposed Drive roll)—now there’s your penalty! 
In most cases, the Keeper would boost or penalize a 
roll with a single "bonus die" or "penalty die," but where 
conditions are highly advantageous or dire, a second bonus 
die or penalty die could be applied.
One bonus die and one penalty die cancel each other out.
For each bonus die: 
Roll an additional "tens" 
percentage die alongside 
the usual pair of percentage 
dice when making a skill 
roll. Y ou are now rolling 
three  separate dice: one 
"units" die and two "tens" 
dice. If you have a bonus 
die, you should use the 
"tens" die that yields the 
better (lower) result. 
For each penalty die: 
Roll an additional "tens" 
percentage die alongside 
the usual pair of percentage 
dice. Y ou are now rolling 3 
separate dice: one "units" 
die and two "tens" dice. For 
a penalty, use the "tens" 
die that yields the worse 
(highest) result. 
Harvey gets drawn into a game of chess with Edgar, 
another investigator. There is nothing riding on the 
outcome of the game, but the players still want to know 
who wins. Both sides have the goal ‘to win’. These goals 
are mutually exclusive; if one wins the other must lose. 
The situation is also irreversible; if Edgar wins, there 
is nothing Harvey can do to change that (thus the roll 
cannot be pushed). Neither has ‘play chess’ as a skill, so 
both agree to use INT. Both players roll a Regular suc-
cess. Edgar has the higher INT, and so wins the game.
Two rival investigators, Malcolm and Hugh, are vying 
for the affection of Lady Greene. Only one can gain 
her hand in marriage, thus the Keeper determines that 
an opposed roll is needed to determine the outcome of 
their wooing. It is decided that each should make an 
opposed Charm roll. The Keeper reviews the events of 
the scenario so far: Malcolm has visited Lady Greene 
twice, each time lavishing expensive gifts upon her, 
while Hugh has only visited once and brought no gifts 
at all. The Keeper states that Malcolm has an advan-
tage and will get a bonus die in the opposed roll.
Hugh’s player rolls first against his Charm skill of 
55, getting 45—a Regular success.
Malcolm’s player rolls against his Charm skill 
with one bonus die, rolling one units die and two 
tens dice (see fig 1.) The units die reads 4 and can be 
paired with either of the two tens dice to give scores 
of 44 or 24. Malcolm’s player takes the lower result 
24—a Hard success.
Malcolm wins the opposed roll, and his proposal 
of marriage to Lady Greene is accepted.
Figure 1: Bonus Dice
Figure 2: Penalty Dice
===== PDF page index 103 (rulebook p.103) =====
92 
Call of Cthulhu
Difficulty Levels vs. Bonus/Penalty Dice
In the majority of cases, only one person, usually the player, 
makes a skill roll. Any factors that provide an advantage or 
disadvantage for the investigator should be factored into the 
difficulty level set by the Keeper. Bonus dice and penalty dice 
may be awarded in conjunction with difficulty levels, at the 
Keeper’s discretion, but doing so should be the exception 
rather than the rule. 
In the case of an opposed roll (wherein both sides are 
rolling in opposition to one another, as in melee combat) 
difficulty levels are never set. The level of success achieved 
by one side is, in effect, the level of difficulty that the other 
side must compete against. If there are factors that provide a 
distinct advantage or disadvantage for one of the characters 
involved, the Keeper should grant a bonus die or a penalty 
die to that player.
Skill rolls: Set level of difficulty.
Opposed rolls: Award penalty dice or bonus dice.
Combined Skill Rolls
Some situations allow or demand the use of more than 
one skill. Only one dice roll is made, and the result then 
compared with each of the skills named. The Keeper will 
specify whether a success is required for both skills ( i.e. the 
roll is a success when measured against each of the skills) or 
if only one of the skills need be successful.
Note the importance of using a single dice roll in 
the latter example. Harvey has only 10% skill in both 
Mechanical Repair and Electrical Repair. The chance of 
success when making one dice roll and comparing it to both 
 An evil cultist is attempting to push a door open 
as Harvey pushes it closed from the other side. This 
calls for a STR or SIZ roll. The Keeper lacks statistics 
for the cultist and must set an appropriate difficulty 
level. He decides that the cultist’s STR and SIZ would 
both be between 50 and 89, requiring Harvey to 
make a roll of Hard difficulty level to push the door 
closed. The Keeper allows Harvey to choose whether 
to use his STR or his SIZ (he uses his SIZ of course, it 
is much higher). If he fails, he might be able to push 
the roll by throwing himself recklessly against the 
door, but only at the risk of taking physical damage 
should he fail.
If the cultist is a key non-player character (with 
STR 80 and SIZ 65), the Keeper may feel that it would 
be more fun to have both sides make an opposed 
roll. Harvey rolls 57 against his SIZ of 80, giving 
him a Regular success. The Keeper rolls 15, which is 
an Extreme success for the cultist’s STR. Harvey is 
knocked back, with no chance of pushing the roll.
 In a dire turn of events, two investigators, Felix and 
Harrison, have been captured by the insane cultists 
of the Scarlet Smile. The cultists decide to have some 
fun at the investigators’ expense, decreeing that both 
must undertake the Ordeal of Pain, from which only 
one can survive; the loser will be sacrificed to the 
cultists’ foul god.
The Ordeal of Pain involves lifting up a huge rock 
and holding it aloft. Whoever holds the rock up the 
longest will win. This requires an opposed Strength 
roll from each of the investigators. The Keeper rules 
that Harrison must take a penalty die, as he recently 
suffered a major wound (he received an injury when 
he was captured by the cultists) and is still recovering.
Felix’s player rolls 51 against STR 65—a Regular 
success.
Harrison’s STR is 55. His player rolls 20 and 40 
on two tens dice and 1 on the units die (see fig 2.), 
which can be combined to read 21 or 41. The extra 
die was a penalty die so Harrison must take the 
higher result—a Regular success.
Both players have achieved a Regular success, 
and so Felix wins because he has the higher STR.
Felix is able to hold the rock above his head for 
longer than Harrison. The cultists jeer and lead 
Harrison off towards their altar.
"Sorry Harrison, I don't intend to die today."
===== PDF page index 104 (rulebook p.104) =====
93 
chapter 5: game system
skills simultaneously is 10%. If two separate rolls were made, 
first against Mechanical Repair and then against Electrical 
Repair, the chance of succeeding in both would be 1%.
The Keeper must decide whether a situation calls for 
sequential skill rolls or a combined skill roll.
Charm, Fast Talk, Intimidate, and  
Persuade Skills: Difficulty Levels
An investigator may have a Charm skill of 75%, but this does 
not mean that he or she can charm anyone and everyone 
75% of the time. The difficulty level is based on the opposing 
factor; in this case the matching social skill (either Charm, 
Fast Talk, Intimidate, or Persuade) or Psychology skill 
(whichever is higher). Thus, if the opposing skill is 50% or 
higher, a Hard success is required (a roll equal to or below 
half skill). If the opposing skill is 90% or higher, an Extreme 
success is required (a roll equal to or below one-fifth of skill). 
For the vast majority of non-player characters, these skills 
will be below 50%, and so the difficulty level will be Regular 
and the player only needs a regular success.
i If the non-player character is positively inclined 
towards the player’s goal, don’t bother rolling dice, 
but simply have them agree. 
i If the non-player character lacks strong feelings 
towards the player’s goal then no modification to the 
difficulty level is required.
i If the non-player character is strongly opposed to 
the player’s goal, the difficulty is raised by one or two 
levels.
i If the player comes up with something to support 
their case, such as a substantive argument (if using 
Persuade), or is holding a weapon and is clearly will-
ing to use it (in the case of Intimidate), the Keeper 
should lower the difficulty by one level.
The lowest chance of success requires an Extreme success 
(equal to or below one-fifth of the skill), but in some rare 
circumstances the Keeper may rule that there is no chance 
of success and that no roll is allowed.
A deranged cultist suddenly moves to draw a gun on 
Harvey. A successful Spot Hidden roll would allow 
Harvey to see the cultist’s hand moving towards the 
gun, while a successful Psychology would allow him 
to anticipate the action through the cultist’s demean-
or. The Keeper asks for a combined Spot Hidden and 
Psychology roll for Harvey. A success on either skill 
will allow Harvey to anticipate the attacker’s action, 
and perhaps give Harvey a chance to act first. 
Later, Harvey attempts to repair an electric 
turbine. The item is both mechanical and electrical, 
so the Keeper asks for a combined Mechanical Repair 
and Electrical Repair roll. One roll is made and the 
result is compared to both skills—in this case both 
must be successful to achieve the task.
Brian’s investigator is trying to intimidate a cultist 
into revealing the name of the cult’s contact in the 
police force. The cultist is a doctor by profession, and 
the Keeper decides that the doctor’s Intimidation 
and Psychology skills are below 50%. The difficulty 
level therefore begins as Regular. Of course the cultist 
strongly desires not to reveal his contact, and so the 
Keeper increases the difficulty level by two steps to 
Extreme. 
Brian fails the skill roll. Brian seeks to push the 
roll by threatening violence. He pulls out a crowbar, 
swings it near the doctor’s head and then looks 
the doctor straight in the eye to make sure that he 
understands the implied threat. The Keeper lowers 
the difficulty level to Hard. Brian fails the pushed 
roll, and the Keeper tells how Brian gets carried 
away and, in his frustration, hits the doctor’s head 
with the crowbar, causing a nasty injury. Brian did 
not intend this—it was the consequence of failing the 
pushed roll. Things don’t always go as intended! If 
the player had succeeded in the Intimidation roll, the 
Keeper would be compelled to give up the name of 
the contact (as it was the player’s goal), but as the roll 
was failed, it is now entirely up to the Keeper whether 
the doctor is forthcoming, regardless of any further 
action the investigators may take against him.
"I'm coming in!"
===== PDF page index 105 (rulebook p.105) =====
94 
Call of Cthulhu
Rewards of Experience: 
The Investigator  
Development Phase
When an investigator successfully uses a skill in play, the player 
should check the box beside that skill on the investigator sheet. 
This gives the investigator a chance to learn from experience. 
No tick is earned if the roll used a bonus die. In the case of an 
opposed roll, both sides may achieve a level of success, but only 
one will win, and only the winner may tick their skill.
Typically the investigator development phase occurs at 
the end of a scenario, or if playing through a campaign, at 
the conclusion of a chapter. This may be after one session of 
play or several sessions. If a story continues beyond that, the 
Keeper should look for a pause in the narrative to allow for 
an investigator development phase. 
Once an investigator development phase has been called, 
examine the investigator sheet to see which skills have been 
checked as successes. No matter how many times a skill is 
used successfully in play, only one check per skill can be 
made to see if the investigator improves. 
For each skill check the player rolls 1D100. 
Succeeding at something you are not good at is difficult; 
however, successfully using the skill probably means that the 
investigator learns from the experience. Conversely, being 
expert at something guarantees success most of the time, 
yet that high skill means the investigator is unlikely to learn 
further. It gets progressively harder to add percentiles to a skill.
If the player rolls higher than the current skill number, 
or the result is over 95, then the investigator improves in that 
skill: roll 1D10 and immediately add the result to the current 
skill points. Skills may rise above 100% by this method.
If the player rolls equal to or less than the investigator’s 
skill level, then the investigator hasn’t learned from the 
experience and the skill amount does not change. 
Repeat the procedure for all the skills that been checked, 
then erase all skill checks on the investigator sheet. Skills can 
be checked again during the next game session as they are 
used successfully.
Note: The Cthulhu Mythos and Credit Rating skills 
never receive a skill check, and no box for such a check exists 
on the investigator sheet. Not improving a skill has no other 
consequence. 
Skills of 90% or More
When an investigator attains 90% or more ability in a skill 
during an investigator development phase, add 2D6 points 
to their current Sanity. This reward represents the discipline 
and self-esteem gained in mastering a skill.
A game has finished after a couple of sessions of play, 
and Harvey has checks against several skills. Harvey’s 
player rolls against his Stealth skill of 20%. She rolls 
08, and so Harvey does not improve in this ability. She 
then rolls Library Use (55%) for a result of 68—Har-
vey’s skill has improved. 1D10 is rolled, giving a result 
of 3. Harvey’s Library Use rises to 58%.
"I'm beginning to lose my patience with you"
===== PDF page index 106 (rulebook p.106) =====
95 
chapter 5: game system
Other Activities During the  
Investigator Development Phase
During the investigator development phase, the player also 
has the opportunity to:
T Gain Sanity points through their investigator spend-
ing time with an aspect from their own backstory 
(see Self-help, page 167).
T Check their Credit Rating and review their finances 
(see Investigator Development Phase: Employ -
ment and Credit Rating, page 96).
T Reduce all sanity limits by one (see Getting used to 
the Awfulness, page 169).
Altering an Investigator’s Backstory
A player is free to alter or add background entries on their 
investigator sheet as and when they please, subject to certain 
limitations. The player may not erase or alter entries listed 
under Injuries and Scars, Phobias and Manias, Encounters 
with Strange Entities, or anything that has been amended or 
added by the Keeper without the Keeper’s permission.
Phobias and manias may only be erased through the use 
of treatment (see Psychotherapy, page 167).
The investigator’s key connection (see page 45) may be 
altered only during the investigator development phase, and 
only by the player. Guidance on using, losing, and replacing a 
key connection can be found under Self-help (see page 167).
Credit Rating and  
Investigator Expenditure
Attempting to track personal finances in a manner similar 
to real life within the game would introduce unnecessary 
complexity. However, using a slightly abstracted method, 
a gauge of an investigator’s living standard and spending 
power becomes possible.
An investigator’s starting Credit Rating (CR) is 
determined during character creation, based upon the 
investigator’s chosen profession (see Sample Occupations  
pages 40-41). 
Day-to-Day Expenses  
and General Living Standards
There is no requirement to make any account of accommodation, 
food, or incidental travel expenses, so long as an investigator’s 
expenditure falls within the bounds of his or her living standard 
(see Credit Rating, page 61). In addition, a character can spend 
up to his or her Spending Level on any given day.
It is likely that money will only occasionally become an 
issue in play, when large amounts are being spent. This may 
include preparing for a major trip, purchasing expensive 
items such as a vehicle or rare book, or hiring extra staff.
The combination of being allowed to spend freely within 
the bounds of their living standard and the freedom of 
not being required to record expenditure below a certain 
spending level is intended to minimize bookkeeping. The 
use of this system may to lead to areas of uncertainty as to 
exactly what is within the bounds of an individual’s living 
standard and whether an investigator has exceeded their 
spending level. As always, the Keeper is the arbiter of such 
matters and is advised to intervene only when an investigator 
has clearly exceeded their spending level.  
Spending Beyond  
One’s Spending Limit
When an investigator spends an amount beyond their 
spending limit, the player must reduce their cash by the full 
amount spent. If cash is insufficient, the investigator may 
seek to use their assets. Converting assets into cash can take 
time; how long is up to the Keeper. Mortgaging a property, 
selling antiques, gaining loans, and so on all take time. If the 
investigator is away from their hometown, this is likely to 
take even longer.
If multiple purchases of less than the investigator’s 
spending threshold are made on the same day, the Keeper 
may insist on combining the total purchases for comparison 
with the investigator’s spending level, and demand that a 
cash spend is deducted if the spending limit is exceeded.
Cecil has a Sword skill of 85%. Having success -
fully employed the skill in play, a check is made for 
improvement in the skill during the investigator de -
velopment phase. Cecil’s player rolls 97, and so rolls 
1D10, adding 8 points to the skill. Cecil is now a true 
expert swordsman and gains 2D6 Sanity points. 
Harvey begins the game with a Credit Rating of 41 
(Average). This affords him an average living stan -
dard; he may stay in moderately priced hotels, eat 
out (economically) and take the occasional taxi. In 
addition, he may spend up to $10 per day. None of 
this requires any bookkeeping on the player’s part.
Harvey spends a couple of sessions of play carrying 
out investigations in Boston, travelling around by bus 
and taxi, visiting libraries, interviewing people, and 
all the usual things a Call of Cthulhu  investigator 
might get up to. This is all within his living standard 
and spending limit. No bookkeeping is required.

===== PDF page index 107 (rulebook p.107) =====
96 
Call of Cthulhu
Money Coming In
During the game a character may receive a large sum of 
money, perhaps as a reward. Such a sum can be added to cash 
in the short term or be invested in time as part of their assets. 
Going into Debt
How debt is taken on and repaid is all part of your story. 
Perhaps the investigator’s car must be sold, or money must 
be sought from a loan shark. While financial transactions 
are not intended to be the focus of play, the steady decline of 
a character’s Sanity may well go hand-in-hand with physical 
and material decline.
Investigator Development Phase: 
Employment and Credit Rating
Ill-health (physical or mental) or continued absence from 
work may lead to loss of employment and a fall in income. 
Some professions do not require the investigator to be 
actively employed to derive an income (such as Dilettante), 
and so are not prone to loss of employment. However a stock 
market crash will have a major effect on such an individual’s 
finances, and events should be dealt with at the Keeper’s 
discretion (perhaps using Luck rolls). Conversely, Credit 
Rating might be raised when an investigator acquires a 
higher-paying job.
A person can be rich one day and on the street the next, 
but a gradual decline is more common. If an investigator 
loses their employment, they lose their income, and their 
Credit Rating will fall. A loss of assets does not necessarily 
indicate a loss of Credit Rating if one still has a reliable 
income.
Where an investigator’s financial situation has undergone 
a significant change, the Keeper should decide on one of the 
following options. The following list of conditions ranges 
from good to bad, and should generally be applied during 
the investigator development phase.
Harvey has a spending limit of $10 per day. One 
day he makes numerous spends; a camera, a short 
international telegram, and taking a contact out to 
dinner at a plush restaurant. He then wishes to at -
tend a show at the music hall. At this point the Keeper 
decides that Harvey has spent $15 (exceeding his $10 
spending limit). Harvey reduces his cash by $15.
Harvey wants to buy a 12-gauge shotgun, costing 
$40. This being above his $10 spending limit, he 
reduces his cash by $40 (from $82 to $42).
Later, Harvey wishes to take a trip to England, 
choosing to travel by sea, first class, costing $120.  
This is beyond Harvey’s available cash. Harvey has 
$1665 tied up in assets, and seeks to realize some 
of that capital by getting a loan from the bank. The 
Keeper agrees to this and decides that it might take a 
week to get the money. Harvey transfers $245 from 
his assets to his cash. From the $245, he spends $120 
on the ticket, leaving $125, which he adds to his 
remaining cash of $42. His cash is now $167, and his 
assets $1400. When he gets to England, his finances 
will function just as they did back home (average 
living standards and a $10 per day spending limit).
Spending 
Money in Call 
of Cthulhu
If your characters travel 
to a place with a lower 
cost of living then they 
should find their money 
buys more. For example, if 
Harvey journeyed to rural 
India, he would find he 
was relatively rich and that 
he was able to afford a 
living standard above his 
usual one.
Harvey has gone on a shopping spree.

===== PDF page index 108 (rulebook p.108) =====
97 
chapter 5: game system
I’m rich! When an investigator comes into money, they 
should check to see if their assets are equal to those of a 
higher living standard bracket. If this is the case, the player 
should increase their investigator’s Credit Rating in steps of 
1D10 until their Credit Rating is within the new bracket. 
Things are looking up: if the investigator has been promot-
ed, their Credit Rating should rise accordingly (add 1D6 
Credit Rating).
Life goes on as usual: if nothing much has changed to affect 
the investigator’s income, their Credit Rating will not alter.
Tightening one’s belt: the investigator is demoted or takes 
a period of unpaid leave. Decrease Credit Rating by 1D10.
Sold the family silver:  the investigator has spent the vast 
majority of their assets. If the investigator’s total worth (cash 
plus assets) now equals the asset value of a lower income 
level, decrease Credit Rating by 1D10.
Bad luck and troubles: the investigator loses their main source 
of income, usually their job. Decrease Credit Rating by 2D10 
with each following investigator development phase. If there is 
a state safety net, the minimum Credit Rating will be 1D10-1. 
Crash! The sudden loss of all income and/or all debts being 
called in (such as in a stock market crash) lead to a dramatic 
decline in the character's fortunes. The investigator must 
reduce his or her Credit Rating by 1D100. If an investigator’s 
Credit Rating withstands the loss, it indicates that either 
investigator is offered another job immediately or that they 
secreted money away somewhere safe (note the lowest Cred-
it Rating is zero—negative numbers are ignored). 
During the investigator development phase, following 
the review of Credit Rating, the investigator’s cash should 
be refreshed, adding the amount of cash indicated on the 
chart for their present Credit Rating to any remaining cash 
they possess. Assets can change in one of two ways. First, 
the investigator’s Credit Rating can rise or fall (as a result of 
a change in employment, for example), in which case their 
asset value should be recalculated to fit the revised Credit 
Rating score. Second, an investigator can spend or accrue 
a large sum of money that will affect their asset value and, 
if sufficient, also alter their Credit Rating score. The Keeper 
should use the advice above to change the Credit Rating 
and Asset Value of each investigator in a way that feels 
appropriate to events in the story. Continuing with the status 
quo is of course the default,  and Keepers should only seek to 
make changes when they are warranted.
Contacts
During the game, investigators may wish to make use of 
their personal and professional contacts. The Keeper can 
either simply allow for the existence of a contact or ask for a 
dice roll. Players can make rolls to establish contacts for their 
investigators using whichever skill or characteristic seems 
most appropriate: Chemistry to know a chemist, Medicine 
to know a surgeon, and so on. 
A successful roll when establishing a contact means that 
either the non-player character has heard of the investigator 
(by reputation) or that the investigator has previously met 
the contact. Apply modifiers to the roll as appropriate. 
Location is a big factor—being far from home or in a 
sparsely populated area would increase the difficulty level. If 
the investigator is on his or her home ground and trying to 
contact someone of the same profession, the Keeper should 
lower the difficulty level. 
Establishing a contact does not automatically mean 
that the contact will do as the investigator wishes; some 
persuasion, fast talk, charm, or intimidation may be 
required, and should be roleplayed. 
If the player wishes to push the roll to establish a contact, 
the Keeper should make the pushed roll out of the player’s 
sight (a concealed dice roll), so the player does not know the 
outcome. A suggested consequence for failing the pushed roll 
is to allow the investigator to unwittingly meet an antagonistic 
or unreliable contact. Such a contact may appear helpful to the 
investigator, but will double-cross or deceive the investigator 
in some manner. A concealed roll is used in this instance, 
since knowledge of the outcome of the dice roll would inform 
the player as to the contact’s disposition.
If Harvey (starting in the ‘average income’ bracket) 
came into money such that his assets increased to 
$30,000, this would bring him within the ‘wealthy’ 
bracket for the 1920s ($25,000–$44,500). His Credit 
Rating was previously 41 (average). His player rolls a 
1D10—resulting in a 4—and 4 is added to Harvey’s 
Credit Rating, raising it to 45. Another two rolls are 
made, a 3 raises his Credit Rating to 48, then a 9 
raises it to 57. Credit Rating 57 is within the ‘wealthy’ 
income bracket, so no more rolls are added.
At the end of the adventure in England, Harvey re -
turns to Boston. His finances have been depleted by 
the trip but he has a great story to publish. Harvey has 
$80 cash and only $50 in assets remaining. The Keeper 
agrees that Harvey still has his job and, while he had 
to sell his house and move into rented accommoda -
tion, he may remain in the Average income bracket. 
The Keeper feels this best fits ‘Sold the family silver’ 
(his combined wealth is now a little more than that of 
‘Poor’), and so insists on a decrease in Credit Rating 
of 1D10. Harvey’s player rolls 7, so Harvey’s Credit 
Rating drops from 41 to 34. Referring to the Cash and 
Assets chart, a Credit Rating of 34 gets $68 cash, so this 
is added to his remaining money, giving Harvey a total 
of $148 in cash. Harvey’s assets remain at $50.
===== PDF page index 109 (rulebook p.109) =====
98 
Call of Cthulhu
Training
Given enough money, someone will teach anything. The 
existence of training makes game sense only in campaigns, 
where the same investigators meet regularly to engage in an 
ongoing mystery.
One should not go to school and learn more than 1D10 
points in a skill per four months of game time without good 
reason. The Keeper decides if multiple courses can be taken 
and how to judge if the investigator’s class participation is 
satisfactory. An experience check comes automatically upon 
successfully completing a segment of training; however too 
many adventures in a semester will invalidate classroom 
work or practice for that term.
At the Keeper’s option, the learning rate for a skill might be 
increased or the learning interval shortened if the investigator 
has access to a renowned teacher. Such access should come as 
a reward for an outstanding deed, or after great perseverance, 
since many compete for the favor of the famous.
Player and Keeper may arrange self-study of any academic 
subject. The investigator must study for four months, after 
which the player rolls as if for a skill check (tick) in that skill 
(attempting to roll above their current skill level on 1D100 
and gaining 1D10 skill points if successful).
Combat skill specialisms, such as Sword, are so little used that 
schools and personal trainers represent the only way to learn.
Aging
There are various modifiers applied during investigator 
creation to reflect the investigator’s age. In the rare instances 
that an investigator ages significantly in play, modifiers 
should be applied to reflect the change in age. This is 
unlikely to be a factor in many games, but may come in to 
play in a campaign, or when jumping decades and picking 
up an investigator’s story later in life. Aging may also occur 
suddenly as a result of a spell or magical gate; such aging 
may inflict the negative physical effects without the gain in 
education.
The aging effects are cumulative, so if aging two decades 
from thirties to fifties, apply modifiers for turning both forty 
and fifty.
Turning 20: Make an improvement check for EDU. Add 5 
points among STR and SIZ.
Turning 40: Make an improvement check for EDU. Deduct 
5 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 5. 
Reduce MOV by 1.
Turning 50: Make an improvement check for EDU. Deduct 
5 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 5. 
Reduce MOV by 1.
Turning 60: Make an improvement check for EDU. Deduct 
10 points among STR, CON or DEX, and reduce APP by 5. 
Reduce MOV by 1.
Turning 70: Deduct 20 points among STR, CON or DEX, 
and reduce APP by 5. Reduce MOV by 1.
Turning 80: Deduct 40 points among STR, CON or DEX, 
and reduce APP by 5. Reduce MOV by 1.
Each decade thereafter:  Deduct 80 points among STR, 
CON or DEX. Reduce MOV by 1.
Harvey plays a few 1920s stories, after which the 
Keeper wishes to play a scenario set in the 1930s. This 
finds Harvey 10 years older (now aged 52) and so the 
aging effects are applied. A dice roll of 98 grants Har-
vey 1D10 improvement to his EDU, adding 9 points 
for an EDU of 93. The player then reduces Harvey’s 
CON and APP by 5 points each. Harvey is still a hand-
some fellow (APP 75). His hit points are decreased by 1 
to 14 as a result of his drop in Constitution. His MOV 
drops from 6 to 5, he’s not as fast as he used to be, but 
all in all, Harvey is aging pretty well!
Harvey has traveled to London and wants to go 
through the archives of The Times for unpublished 
evidence linked to his investigation. He is refused ac-
cess to The Times’ archives, and so seeks to establish 
a contact among the local press who might be able 
to vouch for him and gain him access. There is no 
journalism skill, so the Keeper suggests either Pho -
tography (Harvey may know a fellow photographer) 
or Own Language (as the skill most associated with 
being a journalist). The Keeper raises the difficultly 
level to Hard, as Harvey is a long way from home. 
Harvey has Own Language 84% and half of this or 
less must be rolled to establish a contact. Harvey fails 
the roll, and can find no contacts. He persists with 
trawling every minor publication, and the Keeper 
grants a pushed roll, rolling the dice out of the player’s 
view (concealed roll). The roll is failed again and 
the Keeper informs the player that Harvey contacts 
Martyn Lace, publisher of The Camden Enquirer , 
who claims to know of Harvey’s reputation as a 
photographer. Lace is curious about Harvey, and will 
appear helpful while trying to find out about Harvey’s 
investigation for his own gain. Perhaps he will warn 
Harvey’s enemies (for a reward) or publish the story 
himself, thus exposing Harvey’s careful work.
===== PDF page index 110 (rulebook p.110) =====
99 
chapter 5: game system
Optional Rules
Spending Luck
After the player has made a skill roll (using a skill or 
characteristic), Luck points may be spent to alter the result. The 
player can use Luck points to alter a roll on a 1-for-1 basis. The 
points spent are deducted from the investigator’s Luck score, 
which will reduce the chance of passing a future Luck roll. 
Luck points may not be spent on Luck rolls, damage rolls, 
Sanity rolls, or rolls to determine the amount of Sanity points 
lost. A player may spend any amount of Luck points (up to 
their current Luck value) on a roll. A player may only spend 
Luck to alter one of their own dice rolls.
When a skill roll is failed, the player has the option to 
push the roll OR spend luck; Luck points may not be spent to 
alter the result of a pushed roll.
Criticals, fumbles, and firearm malfunctions always apply, 
and cannot be bought off with Luck points. 
Also, no skill improvement check is earned if Luck points 
were used to alter the dice roll.
In play, an investigator’s Luck will fall through spends and 
rise through recovery (see below).
Recovering Luck points
After each session of play, each player may make an 
improvement check for their Luck. This is rolled in the same 
way as for skill improvement. The player rolls 1D100 and 
if the roll is above their present Luck score they add 1D10 
points to their Luck score. If the roll is equal to or less than 
the investigator’s present Luck score, no points are recovered.
Note: An investigator’s Luck score will vary throughout 
play, but may not exceed 99. The Luck starting value is not 
used again in the game. There are no resets and the starting 
value can be exceeded in play.
The Keeper rolls an Extreme success for a Dark 
Young to trample Harvey into the dust. Harvey fails 
to dodge with a roll of 35, far above his Dodge skill 
of 27. This is life or death, and so Harvey’s player 
spends 30 of Harvey’s Luck points to convert the 
Dodge roll to an Extreme success. Harvey avoids 
death by a hairsbreadth!
At the start of the following session (Harvey 
having somehow survived to fight another day), 
Harvey’s player makes a check for Luck recovery. 
Harvey’s Luck is now down to 15 points. The 
player rolls 37 and so adds 1D10 to Harvey’s Luck, 
increasing it to 21. Let’s hope Harvey doesn’t have to 
rely on his luck today.
