
===== PDF page index 111 (rulebook p.111) =====

===== PDF page index 112 (rulebook p.112) =====

===== PDF page index 113 (rulebook p.113) =====
102 
Call of Cthulhu
espite their best efforts to avoid bloodshed, 
sometimes investigators are faced with 
situations where the outcome can only be 
decided by the fist or gun.
Combat encompasses a range of skills and 
goals; sometimes an investigator may wish to merely subdue 
an opponent without causing undue harm, while at other 
times the goal may be to kill, or simply to flee.
Combat has its own rules that focus on the action and 
help to determine who is doing what, when it is done, and 
the degree of success achieved. Rather than having a single 
roll decide the outcome of the fight, a series of rolls are made 
until there is a clear victor.
Declaration of Intent: “What 
is your character doing?”
The Keeper should always ask the player that question and 
encourage them to describe their investigator’s actions 
rather than use game terminology. “I’m rolling to hit, ” is not 
something an investigator would ever say or do. Endeavor 
to paint a picture with your descriptions of combat and 
encourage your players to do likewise. When the player has 
described their investigator’s action, the Keeper should then 
tell the player which skill to roll dice against. 
Player: “I’m going to punch the guard, then run for the open door. ”
Keeper: “The guard is going to try to grab you. Roll your 
Brawling skill. ”
Keeper: “The monstrous humanoid is running straight at 
you—what are you doing?”
Player: “I raise my shotgun and blast the thing. ”
Keeper: “OK, give me a skill roll for Shotgun. ”
Keeper: “Scott’s investigator is acting crazy—he’s heading 
out of the tent into the freezing cold without his coat or 
mittens. He’ll freeze to death out there!”
Player: “I’m going to grab him and wrestle him to the ground. ”
Keeper: “Let’s have an opposed Brawling roll. ”
Notice how the request for a dice roll develops out of 
what the players say. In the first example the goal is to get past 
the guard, and the punch is simply a method of achieving 
the goal; damage may be inflicted as a consequence, but 
the Keeper uses the dice to judge whether the maneuver is 
accomplished.
In the second example, the player’s goal is clearly to inflict 
maximum damage, so the dice will be used to determine if the 
monster is hit, and to gauge the amount of damage inflicted.
In the third example the player is trying to restrain a 
fellow investigator without inflicting harm. Again the dice 
will be used to gauge the success of the maneuver. 
The dice are then rolled, usually by the Keeper and the 
player simultaneously, and the results used to determine what 
maneuvers are achieved and how much damage is inflicted.
How you describe the outcome of the dice roll is 
important to your story, but of no importance to the game 
mechanics. One Fighting roll which inflicts 6 hit points of 
damage may represent a few good punches, a knee to the 
groin, a series of kicks or a head-butt—your description of 
the outcome should elaborate upon your stated intention, 
suiting the relative success achieved.
Try to use this format each round: allow each character’s 
actions in the story to suggest what rolls are required, resolve 
the dice rolls, incorporate the outcome of the rolls back into 
the story, then move onto the next character. Don’t just 
repeatedly roll dice without any story. 
The Combat Round
It is confusing for everyone when multiple players act and 
speak at once, so to maintain order, combat is structured 
into rounds, with each player taking one turn in each round. 
A combat round is a deliberately elastic unit of time in 
which everyone wishing to act and capable of doing so has 
a chance to complete at least one action. An investigator’s 
equality of opportunity is much more important than the 
notion that a combat round must represent a precise amount 
of real-world time. When every investigator and other 
Keeper-controlled characters have had an opportunity to act, 
that combat round is over and the next round can begin. 
Dexterity and the Order of Attack 
The question of who gets the first opportunity to attack 
can be an important issue in a fight. Determine the order 
of attack by ranking the combatants' DEX from highest to 
lowest. In the case of a draw, the side with the higher combat 
skill goes first.
Actions in a Combat Round
On their turn in DEX order (highest to lowest) each character 
may use their action:
T To initiate an attack using the Fighting or Firearms 
skill*.
T To perform a fighting maneuver.
T To flee from the combat.
T To cast a spell.
T To perform some other action requiring time and 
perhaps a dice roll, such as picking a lock while 
others fight.
*Note that some monsters are capable of multiple attacks in 
one round: these all take place on the monster’s turn.
A character may elect to delay acting until another 
character has acted. If this leads to more than one character 
wishing to act simultaneously, the one with the highest DEX 
takes priority. If both insist on waiting for the other, the 
round may end with neither of them acting and therefore 
losing their action, after which play will continue with the 
usual order of combat next round.

===== PDF page index 114 (rulebook p.114) =====
103 
chapter 6: combat
Fist Fights
The man behind me—the only one of the party older than 
I—croaked the hackneyed “My God!” in the most cracked 
voice I ever heard. Of seven cultivated men, only Sir William 
Brinton retained his composure, a thing the more to his credit 
because he led the party and must have seen the sight first.
—H. P . Lovecraft, The Rats In The Walls
To explain the combat rules, we shall start with a simple, 
old-fashioned, one-on-one fist fight. Later we can add rules 
for melee weapons, multiple opponents, firearms, and other 
options.
This fight might be a barroom brawl, or any situation 
where two people are determined to hurt one another in 
unarmed combat. This is not a boxing match or a martial 
arts class; there are no holds barred here. This is down and 
dirty: fists fly, feet lash out, hair is pulled, foreheads clash, 
nails rake, fingers twist, vulnerable parts are targeted, eyes 
gouged, and teeth spat out. This is all encompassed in one 
skill: Brawling (a specialization of the Fighting skill). The 
alternative to attacking is to try to avoid being hit, and this is 
represented by the Dodge skill. 
Melee attacks are resolved using opposed skill rolls. 
When attacked, a character has a simple choice: either dodge 
or fight back. 
T If the character chooses to fight back, use the target’s 
Fighting skill to oppose the attacker’s Fighting skill. 
T If the character chooses to dodge, use the target’s 
Dodge skill to oppose the attacker’s Fighting skill.
T If the target is neither fighting back nor dodging, 
refer to surprise attacks on page 106.
Resolving a Fighting Attack Made 
Against a Target That is Fighting Back
Both sides roll percentile dice and compare the results with 
their own Fighting skill. The side with the better level of 
success avoids being harmed, and inflicts damage on their 
opponent (see Determining Damage, nearby). If both sides 
achieve the same level of success, the character initiating 
the attack hits the character that is fighting back, inflicting 
damage. 
T If the attacker achieves a higher level of success, they 
deal damage to their target.
T If the defender achieves a higher level of success, he 
or she has successfully blocked, parried or avoided 
the attacker’s blows and simultaneously landed a 
blow of their own upon their attacker, inflicting 
damage.
T In the case of a draw, the attacker wins (when their 
opponent is fighting back).
T If both fail, no damage is inflicted.
Resolving a Fighting Attack Made 
Against a Target That is Dodging
The attacker and the target (who is trying to dodge) make 
an opposed roll using their Fighting skill and Dodge skill 
respectively. If the attacker gains a higher level of success, 
the attack is successful and the attacker inflicts damage on 
the loser (see Determining Damage , below). Otherwise 
the attack is dodged and no damage is dealt. If both sides 
achieve the same level of success, the character dodging wins 
and evades the attack.
T If the attacker achieves a higher level of success, they 
deal damage.
T If the defender achieves a higher level of success, 
they have dodged the attack and take no damage.
T In the case of a draw, the defender wins (when the 
defender is dodging).
T If both fail, no damage is inflicted.
Determining Damage
The amount of damage that an attack delivers is indicated 
on Table XVII: Weapons  (pages 401-405). Note that the 
damage for unarmed human attacks is 1D3 ( e.g. punching 
and kicking).
Extreme Damage and Impales
Greater damage is inflicted if the attacker gains an Extreme 
level of success in their attack. This only occurs if the attack 
is made on a character’s turn in the DEX order, not when 
fighting back: each character gets one moment in the 
spotlight each round, and this is their opportunity to make 
an outstanding attack. 
If the attacker achieves an Extreme success with a non-
impaling weapon (for example, blunt weapons, such as a fist, 
kick, or club), then they have hit a weak spot and caused 
maximum damage (plus maximum damage bonus, if any).
If the attacker achieves an Extreme level of success with 
a penetrating weapon (such as a blade or bullet) then an 
impale has been inflicted. This means that the weapon or 
bullet chanced to strike a vital area, driving deeply through 
arteries or slashing crucial tendons or muscles. Apply the 
increased damage as for an Extreme success with a blunt 
weapon (maximum damage plus maximum damage bonus) 
and add a damage roll for the weapon.
Weapons that can impale are indicated on the Table 
XVII: Weapons (pages 401-405).
Harvey has been cornered by an angry cultist, and 
both are attempting to hurt one another. The cultist 
has a DEX of 55 and so does Harvey. However the 
cultist’s Fighting (Brawling) skill is 70%, which is far 
higher than Harvey’s, so the cultist acts first.
===== PDF page index 115 (rulebook p.115) =====
104 
Call of Cthulhu
Using Weapons in a Fight
Anything that can be picked up and used to hit or stab can be 
considered a melee weapon. If it is the kind of weapon that 
anyone could just pick up and use (a chair leg, kitchen knife, 
etc.), then use the Fighting (Brawl) skill. Such weapons belong 
to the basic weapons category and include simple clubs and 
knives. If the weapon is more cumbersome or complex and 
does not conform to the basic weapons category, a weapon 
specialization skill should be used. Weapons with similar 
characteristics and function are grouped together for the 
purpose of weapon skill specializations. 
Consult Table XVII: Weapons  (pages 401-405) for 
details of the weapon groups and specific weapons, together 
with the damage they inflict.
Improvised Weapons
All sorts of items can be used to inflict physical harm: snooker 
cues, scissors, bottles, rocks and so on. Even a gramophone 
player could be smashed over the back of someone’s head for 
a nasty injury. 
The Keeper should determine the damage done by an 
improvised weapon by using a comparable item on Table 
XVII: Weapons (pages 401-405). If the improvised weapon 
is similar to a basic melee weapon, such as a knife or club, it 
may be used with the Fighting (Brawl) skill. If it is not, the 
Keeper should decide on which Fighting skill specialization 
is appropriate.
Everyone is strongly encouraged to make use of the 
environment in a fight. Doing so will add a unique feel to 
each fight and will make the setting come to life. If every 
fight uses the same old punches, kicks, and regular weapons, 
they may feel repetitive. Picture the scene and grab what 
comes to mind. If the fight takes place in a bar, you should 
be swinging pool cues, throwing bottles, and hitting each 
other with barstools. Fire pokers, hat stands, and ornamental 
swords may be to hand in a mansion. Computer monitors, 
power cables, and scissors could all be deadly in an office. As 
Keeper, encourage your players to improvise and don’t block 
their ideas without good reason. If you want to introduce the 
hand of fate to determine whether that handy improvised 
weapon is present, call for a Luck roll.
No Pushing 
Combat Rolls
There is no option to 
push combat rolls (either 
Fighting or Firearms). Skill 
rolls are resolved with one 
or two rolls, but combat 
is resolved with a sequence 
of rolls. Pushing a skill 
roll indicates a subsequent 
attempt—a concerted 
effort to succeed. In 
combat this subsequent 
attempt would be your 
next punch or your next 
shot, i.e. your next attack.
Does the Monster 
Fight Back or 
Dodge?
The default mode for monsters 
and non-player character is to 
fight back rather than dodge. This 
serves to make combat quicker and 
simpler for the Keeper. Monsters 
and non-player characters should 
only use dodge when their priority 
is to escape.
Frying pans make excellent improvised weapons.
A character with 1D4 damage bonus achieves an 
Extreme level of success when attacking with a 
switchblade. The player rolls 1D4 for the weapon’s 
damage, and adds the maximum damage the weapon 
can inflict (4) together with their maximum damage 
bonus (4). This results in a total of 1D4+8, (a range of 
9 to 12 points of damage).
Old Man Birch has the choice of picking up a knife 
or a sword. With the knife, he would use his Fighting 
(Brawl) skill of 40%. A sword is trickier to use and 
has its own skill, which is not part of the Fighting 
(Brawl) skill. Old Man Birch doesn’t have any skill 
with a sword, so would have to use it at the base skill 
value: Fighting (Sword) 20%.
===== PDF page index 116 (rulebook p.116) =====
105 
chapter 6: combat
Fighting Maneuvers
If a player describes a goal other than simply inflicting 
physical harm, such as disarming their opponent or knocking 
them over, then it can be resolved with a maneuver. This 
may include pushing someone out of the way, throwing the 
opponent to the floor, restraining someone in a headlock, 
disarming an opponent, and so on.
Step 1: Compare Builds
Clearly skill is an important factor in performing a successful 
fighting maneuver, but size and strength also have an effect. 
A small, skillful fighter might unbalance or disarm a larger 
opponent, but there are limits. No human is ever going to 
be able to wrestle a huge monster such as a Dark Y oung 
of Shub-Niggurath to the ground, whatever their skill. 
Conveniently, Size and Strength are already factored into 
each character’s Build, and thus by comparing these we may 
gauge the relative might of the opponents. 
To determine the relative capability of the two opponents 
and whether the character performing the maneuver 
takes penalty dice, simply compare the Build of the two 
combatants. If the character performing the maneuver has 
a smaller Build than their opponent then he or she takes a 
Harvey: DEX 55
 Fighting (Brawl) skill: 25 (Regular) / 12 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
 Dodge skill: 27 (Regular) / 13 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
Old Man Birch: DEX 60     
 Fighting (Brawl) skill: 40 (Regular) / 20 (Hard) / 8 (Extreme)
 Dodge skill: 30 (Regular) / 15 (Hard) / 6 (Extreme)
The first round:
Things go badly for Harvey when he fails to sneak around the house, leading to an encounter with Old Man Birch, 
who tries to punch the intruder.
Old Man Birch has the higher DEX and therefore goes first. 
Old Man Birch’s Action:
The Keeper picks up the dice and states that Old Man Birch is swinging a fist at Harvey. Harvey’s reaction is to duck. 
The Keeper will therefore roll against Old Man Birch’s Fighting (Brawl) skill and will be opposed by Harvey’s Dodge skill.
The Keeper rolls 04 for Old Man Birch’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—an Extreme success.
Harvey requires an Extreme level of success to avoid the blow. Harvey’s player rolls 25 for Harvey’s Dodge skill—a 
Regular success. Not good enough.
Old Man Birch deals 1D3 damage for an unarmed attack, to which is added his 1D4 damage bonus. As it was an 
Extreme success, the maximum result is used in place of rolling dice; Harvey takes the full 7 points of damage (3 + 4 = 7).
The Keeper tells how Old Man Birch catches Harvey with a left hook before he has a chance to flee. This is followed 
up with a couple of solid jabs as Harvey reels back, blood running down his face. A smile spreads over Old Man Birch’s 
face as he gets a taste of victory.
Harvey’s action:
Harvey is cornered and lashes out at his foe. Old Man Birch attempts to side-step and clout Harvey again. His 
intentions include damage, so this means he is fighting back.
Harvey’s player rolls 25 for Harvey’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—a Regular success. 
The Keeper rolls 23 for Old Man Birch’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—a Regular success.
When the target is fighting back, the attacker wins in the case of a tie. Harvey rolls 1D3 for 2 points of damage.
That’s the end of round one.
Old Man Birch has a good left hook.
===== PDF page index 117 (rulebook p.117) =====
106 
Call of Cthulhu
penalty die for each point of difference (to a maximum of 
two penalty dice). If an opponent exceeds the attacker’s build 
by three or more, any fighting maneuvers are ineffective; the 
attacker may be able to lay hands on their opponent, but 
lacks the strength and size required to take advantage of 
their grip.
T If the character performing the maneuver has a 
Build that is three or more points lower than their 
opponent’s, the maneuver is impossible.
T If the character performing the maneuver has a 
Build that is two points lower than their opponent’s, 
the maneuver roll is made with two penalty dice.
T If the character performing the maneuver has a 
Build that is one point lower than their opponent’s, 
the maneuver roll is made with one penalty die.
T If the character performing the maneuver has the 
same (or higher) Build as their opponent, no addi -
tional modifiers are applied.
Step 2: Make the Attack Roll
A maneuver is treated the same way as a regular Fighting 
attack. Most maneuvers will use the Brawling skill, though 
some may be performed using another specialization: for 
example, the Fighting (Sword) skill might be used to disarm 
a person. The Keeper must rule according to the situation. 
The opponent should choose to either dodge or fight back as 
they would when attacked normally. 
Maneuver attack roll:
T If the target is dodging: the attacker’s Fighting skill is 
opposed by the target’s Dodge skill. If the character 
performing the maneuver achieves a higher level of 
success than the character dodging, the maneuver 
is successful (if tied, the target is able to dodge the 
maneuver).
T If the target is fighting back: the attacker’s Fighting 
skill is opposed by the target’s Fighting skill. If the 
character fighting back achieves a higher level of 
success, the maneuver fails and the opponent inflicts 
damage on the character performing the maneuver 
(if tied, the maneuver is successful). 
T The target of an attack may use a maneuver of their own: 
Resolve as for fighting back, but instead of inflicting 
damage, apply the effect of their maneuver.
A successful maneuver allows the character to achieve 
one goal, such as:
T Disarming an opponent, or wresting an item such as 
a book out of the opponent’s hand.
T Place the enemy at an on-going disadvantage, either 
inflicting one penalty die on the opponent’s future 
actions or granting one bonus die to allies’ actions 
taken against the target (choose whichever seems 
most appropriate to the situation). This disadvantage 
may be as a result of physical restraint or of having 
been knocked to the floor. 
T To escape when physically restrained by another 
character. The restrained character may use a maneu-
ver of their own on their turn to break out of a hold, 
such as a bear hug or neck lock; otherwise they are au-
tomatically held until their attacker releases them, is 
incapacitated or suffers a major wound (see Wounds 
and Healing, page 119).
T Pushing an opponent over a cliff, out of a large win-
dow or simply knocking the opponent to the floor.
The Keeper may inflict damage on those engaged 
in a maneuver if it is appropriate to the events in the 
story—clearly someone falling from a second story 
window is going to take damage unless they land in a 
safety net or similar.
Striking the First Blow 
(Surprise)
Something must happen to start a combat; someone 
must strike the first blow. Opponents may square up 
to each other like two boxers in the ring, knowing 
they are engaged in a fight even before the first punch 
is thrown. If this is the case, the Keeper should start 
a combat round. 
Fighting Maneuvers  
Require a Definite Goal
Sometimes a player may state an action as 
a goal; in response to having a gun pointed 
in their face they might simply say, “I’m 
pushing his arm away so the gun isn’t 
pointing at my face”. Pushing an arm away 
isn’t a goal—it’s an action. It doesn’t 
define a strong objective; the opponent 
could simply say they are pulling back 
and firing the gun when it comes to their 
turn. A goal should be something definite 
such as, “I’m knocking the gun from his 
hand”, “I’m seizing the pistol from him”, 
or “I’m grabbing the gun arm and keeping it 
pointed away from me”. Each of these has 
a definite effect on the status quo and 
thus constitutes a goal.
===== PDF page index 118 (rulebook p.118) =====
107 
chapter 6: combat
Alternatively the attack may be a complete surprise; a 
sudden knee to the groin or punch to the jaw, for example. 
When someone states that they are making a sudden, 
unexpected attack, they should have the opportunity to 
surprise their opponent. If the Keeper were to automatically 
switch to combat rounds (see below), the person who 
declared the first attack may end up acting last in the DEX 
order, which would make no narrative sense. 
Of course if the target has their wits about them, they 
may see the attack coming. The Keeper may allow a skill 
roll to determine if the target anticipates the attack, using 
either Listen or Spot Hidden to hear or see it coming, or 
Psychology to perceive the attacker’s intent. The Stealth skill 
of the attacker can be used to set the difficulty level for the 
investigator’s Listen, Spot Hidden, or Psychology skill, or 
vice versa if the investigator is the one making the surprise 
attack (remembering that the player should be rolling the 
dice where possible). 
Depending on the outcome of the roll:
T If the target anticipates the attack, they may choose 
to dodge or fight back.
T If the target fails to anticipate the attack, the Keeper 
may allow the attack to be an automatic success 
(unless a fumble is rolled) or award the attacker a 
Harvey: DEX 55
 Fighting (Brawl) skill: 25 (Regular) / 12 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
 Dodge skill: 27 (Regular) / 13 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
 Build: 0
Thug: DEX 50     
 Fighting skill: 35 (Regular) / 17 (Hard) / 7 (Extreme)
 Dodge skill: 25 (Regular) / 12 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
 Build: 1
Harvey is following a cultist that he knows to be carrying a copy of the Book of Eibon in a briefcase through Boston. 
When he loses sight of the cultist in the crowd, Harvey makes a Spot Hidden roll and fails. Harvey runs down the street 
looking in every side alley. The Keeper grants a pushed Spot Hidden roll, which is also failed. As a consequence the 
Keeper tells how Harvey follows his target into the shadows of one of those alleys, only to be jumped by a knife-wielding 
thug demanding money. 
The first round:
Harvey has the higher DEX and therefore goes first. 
Harvey’s Action:
Harvey tries to push the thug out of his way and run past; it’s a risk, but Harvey knows that he will lose the trail if he 
delays. This is a Fighting Maneuver, the goal being to push the thug away long enough for Harvey to run past.
The thug has a Build 1. This is one point higher than Harvey’s Build (of zero) so Harvey will have one penalty die. 
The thug is fighting back, attempting to stab Harvey. The thug has a knife and so uses his Fighting (Brawl) skill to attack.
Harvey’s player rolls with a penalty die, getting 12 and 22. He must take the higher roll—a Regular success. 
The Keeper rolls 03 for the thug—an Extreme success. 
 While trying to push the thug aside, Harvey is stabbed for 6 points of damage (1D4 for the switchblade and 1D4 
damage bonus). If this had been the thug’s action, the Extreme success would have resulted in an impale for 8 + 1D4 
damage (maximum weapon damage and maximum damage bonus plus a roll for weapon damage).
The thug’s action:
The thug threatens Harvey with the knife and demands money. Harvey, knowing that he is badly injured and 
outmatched, surrenders his wallet.
Harvey struggles with the thug as the cultist flees.
===== PDF page index 119 (rulebook p.119) =====
108 
Call of Cthulhu
bonus die, depending on the situation. If the attacker 
is making a ranged attack (for example with a gun or 
throwing knife), a roll should always be made to hit.
Note: Hitting someone on the head (when attacking 
unseen) from the rear would automatically succeed (unless 
fumbled), whereas seizing a weapon from someone’s hand 
would only receive a bonus die.
When attacking a target that is unable to or chooses not 
to dodge or fight back, the attacker should roll their attack 
normally, but will only fail to hit if they roll a fumble. It 
should be remembered that the Keeper decides when dice 
rolls are called for. If a person doesn’t wake up, why would 
a dice roll be required to stab or shoot them in their sleep?
Once a surprise attack has been resolved, the Keeper 
should then switch to combat rounds as detailed below.
Outnumbered
When a character is outnumbered by the opposition, the 
character is at a disadvantage. Once a character has either 
fought back or dodged in the present combat round, all 
subsequent melee attacks on them are made with one bonus 
die. This does not apply to attacks made using firearms.
Characters and monsters that have more than one attack 
per round may also dodge or fight back that number of times 
before the bonus die is applied. Thus a ghoul with three 
attacks can fight back three times before its attackers gain 
a bonus die. Note that some Mythos entities can never be 
outnumbered by investigators (see Chapter 14: Monsters, 
Beasts, and Alien Gods).
Ranged and Thrown Weapons
Ranged missile attacks (such as bows) are treated like firearms 
(target has the option of Diving for Cover, page 113).
Thrown weapons may be opposed with the Dodge skill in 
the same way as Fighting attacks (see Resolving a Fighting 
Attack Made Against a Target that is Dodging, page 103).
A character may not choose the option of fighting back 
against a ranged (missile) or thrown weapon attack unless he 
or she is within one-fifth of their DEX in feet near the attacker.
Half the attacker’s damage bonus is applied to thrown 
and missile weapons that rely on the user’s strength—this 
applies to bows and slings but not to crossbows.
To resolve a ranged or thrown attack, the Keeper should 
set a difficulty level as for a firearm attack (see Range and 
Firearms Difficulty Levels, page 112).
Escaping Close Combat
A character can use their action to flee melee combat on 
their turn in the order of combat, providing they have an 
escape route and are not physically restrained. 
Armor
Armor reduces damage received, whether it is the natural 
armor of some monsters, body armor worn by a character, 
or the natural defense of an obstacle between the attacker 
and the target. Deduct the number of armor points from 
damage inflicted by attacks passing through the armor.
Note that armor will not reduce damage from magical 
attacks, poison, drowning, etc.
A deep one surprises an investigator. 
Even an old piece of metal will work as armor.
===== PDF page index 120 (rulebook p.120) =====
109 
chapter 6: combat

===== PDF page index 121 (rulebook p.121) =====
110 
Call of Cthulhu
Harvey and his friend Rodger spot the cultist they suspect to be carrying the Book of Eibon in a briefcase. The cultist 
is standing on the station platform, awaiting a train. Harvey takes advantage of the fact that they have not met and 
approaches the cultist to enquire when the next train is due.
Rodger: DEX 70     
 Fighting (Brawl) skill: 40 (Regular) / 20 (Hard) / 8 (Extreme)
 Dodge skill: 42 (Regular) / 21 (Hard) / 8 (Extreme)
 Damage Bonus: 1D4
 Build: 1
 Hit points: 14
Cultist: DEX 60     
 Fighting (Brawl) skill: 30 (Regular) / 15 (Hard) / 6 (Extreme)
 Dodge skill: 30 (Regular) / 15 (Hard) / 6 (Extreme)
 Damage Bonus: 1D4
 Build: 1
 Hit points: 13
Harvey: DEX 55
 Fighting (Brawl) skill: 25 (Regular) / 12 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
 Dodge skill: 27 (Regular) / 13 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
 Damage Bonus: none
 Build: 0 
 Hit points: 15
Harvey attempts to snatch the briefcase from the cultist. The Keeper rules that this constitutes a fighting maneuver 
(see Fighting Maneuvers, page 105) since it will clearly initiate a combat and it is similar in intent to disarming an 
opponent. The cultist’s DEX is higher than Harvey’s, but he is not aware of being in combat until Harvey acts, although 
he may anticipate Harvey’s action—see Striking the First Blow (Surprise) , page 106. Using the rules for surprise 
attacks, the Keeper asks for a Stealth roll from Harvey, setting the difficulty level as Regular (the cultist’s Spot Hidden 
skill is below 50). Harvey is successful and the cultist doesn’t see the attack coming.
Harvey’s surprise attack:
Harvey attempts to snatch the cultist’s case using a fighting maneuver. The cultist does not get a chance to dodge or 
fight back as he is unaware of the attack. Harvey gained a surprise attack and so has one bonus die for his maneuver. 
When figuring the outcome of a Fighting maneuver, the opponent’s Build must always be factored in. The cultist’s Build 
is one step above Harvey’s, so Harvey gains a penalty die. The bonus die and penalty die cancel each other out.
An 11 is rolled for Harvey’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—a Hard success.
No opposing roll is made for the cultist on account of Harvey having the advantage of surprise.
Harvey snatches the bag from the cultist.
Now that Harvey’s surprise attack is concluded, the Keeper switches to using combat rounds (see Striking the First 
Blow (Surprise), page 106).
Combat round one:
Rodger’s action:
Rodger has the highest DEX and so acts first. The Keeper asks what Rodger is doing (see Declaration of Intent: 
“What is your character doing?”  page 102). Rodger’s player leans forward and tells how Rodger is going to grab the 
cultist from behind, keeping hold of him while Harvey punches the cultist’s lights out. The Keeper interprets this as a 
fighting maneuver with the goal of restraining the cultist. Both sides have equal Builds, so there are no bonus dice or 
penalty dice. The cultist tries to fight back, with an elbow to Rodger’s gut.
29 is rolled for Rodger’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—a Regular success.
21 is rolled for the cultist’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—a Regular success.
In the case of a draw with an opponent that is fighting back, the attacker wins.
Rodger’s maneuver is successful and he has grabbed hold of the cultist. The cultist’s blow fails to connect.
Cultist’s action:
The cultist acts next. He struggles to break free of Rodger’s hold, as Rodger strives to keep him held. The cultist is 
making a fighting maneuver. Rodger is simply trying to keep his hold on the cultist. The hold will only be broken if 
the cultist wins the maneuver, otherwise the status quo will remain. The cultist has a penalty die as a result of being 
restrained (see  Fighting Maneuvers, page 105).
===== PDF page index 122 (rulebook p.122) =====
111 
chapter 6: combat
Either 82 or 02 (penalty die) is rolled for the cultist’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—the highest roll is used—a Failure.
Rodger rolls a 24 for his Dodge skill—a Regular success.
The cultist fails to break free. Neither side inflicts damage on the other.
Harvey’s action:
Harvey has the briefcase in his hands, and the cultist is restrained before him. Harvey uses the briefcase as an 
improvised weapon (see Improvised Weapons, page 104) to bash the cultist in the face. The Keeper decides to allow 
Harvey to use his Brawl skill for the attack. The cultist has already fought back this round (versus Rodger) and so 
Harvey gets a bonus die (see Outnumbered, page 108). The cultist attempts to dodge, but suffers one penalty die 
because he is being restrained. 
Either 19 or 89 (bonus die) is rolled for Harvey’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—a Regular success.
Either 01 or 71 (penalty die) is rolled for the cultist’s Dodge skill—a Failure.
The Keeper decides the briefcase will do the same damage as a small club, 1D6. The cultist takes 3 points of damage.
Combat round two:
Other commuters are shocked at the conflict that is taking place, but no one steps forward to intervene.
Rodger’s action:
Rodger already has hold of the cultist, so he doesn’t need to roll dice unless he wishes to do anything in addition to 
continuing to hold him. Rodger decides he’s going to take advantage of his hold on the cultist to slam the cultist’s face 
against a nearby pillar. The cultist attempts to break free. Both sides will make a fighting maneuver roll. The cultist has 
one penalty die for being restrained.
Rodger gets a 49 for his Fighting (Brawl) skill—a failure.
Either 11 or 81 (penalty die) is rolled for the cultist’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—a failure.
Rodger fails to hurt the cultist and the cultist fails to break free. The cultist is still held and the two of them are 
struggling around the platform.
Cultist’s action:
Instead of struggling to break free, the cultist now raises his feet to waist height and pushes against the nearby pillar, 
attempting to overbalance Rodger onto the floor. Rodger continues to hold on and to resist being toppled. Since his goal 
is to avoid the attack, this will use Rodger’s Dodge skill. The cultist has one penalty die for being restrained.
Rodger gets 32 for his Dodge skill—a Regular success.
The Keeper rolls 03 twice (penalty die) for the cultist’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—an Extreme success.
The Keeper rules that hitting the concrete floor is worth 
1D6 damage (like a club) plus the cultist’s 1D4 damage 
bonus. Rodger takes the maximum of 10 points of damage as 
a result of the Extreme success (see Determining Damage, 
page 103). This drops Rodger’s hit points to 4. This is a major 
wound (see Wounds and Healing, page 119) and as a result 
Rodger is automatically knocked prone and must release his 
hold on the cultist. Rodger passes a CON roll and remains 
conscious.
Harvey’s action:
Harvey hates to leave his friend like this, but figures 
the cultist will probably chase after him, and so he flees 
the scene. 
Combat round three:
Rodger is prone on the floor. The cultist is running 
after Harvey.
Rodger’s action:
No action has been taken against Rodger this round, 
so he is free to stand up and act. He draws a throwing 
dagger from his belt and throws it at the cultist’s back. This 
is a thrown weapon attack; the Keeper decides that the 
cultist will not be able to dodge it because he is unaware 
of the attack (see Ranged and Thrown Weapons, page 
108), but Rodger still has to roll to hit.
A Failure is rolled for Rodger’s Throw skill. The 
dagger misses.
 Harvey and the cultist grapple for the briefcase.
===== PDF page index 123 (rulebook p.123) =====
112 
Call of Cthulhu
Firearms
It is true that I have sent six bullets through the head of my 
best friend, and yet I hope to show by this statement that I 
am not his murderer.
—H. P . Lovecraft, The Thing on the Doorstep
To resolve a firearms attack, make a 1D100 roll and compare 
the result with the attacker’s Firearms skill (using the 
appropriate specialization).
The firearms roll is not opposed. The difficulty level is 
determined by the range, with various other factors granting 
either penalty or bonus dice. A failure never deals damage. 
Firearms and the DEX Order
It takes less time to pull a trigger than to swing a club or 
sword, therefore readied firearms may shoot at DEX + 50 in 
the DEX order.
Range and Firearms  
Difficulty Levels
The difficulty level of a firearms skill roll is always set 
according to range. Each doubling of range above the 
weapon’s listed base range on the Weapons Chart increases 
the difficulty level by one step. 
T Within the base range: Regular difficulty level.
T Long range (up to twice the base range):  Hard 
difficulty level.
T Very long range (up to four times the base range): 
Extreme difficulty level.
Any further modifiers use bonus or penalty dice.
At very long range, when only an Extreme success will 
hit the target, an impale only occurs with a critical hit (a roll 
of 01).
Cultist’s action:
The cultist uses his Dominate spell to command 
Harvey to, ‘Stop where you are”. The rules for magic 
and spells are covered later in this book, and all we 
need to know is that the spell fails. However Harvey, 
knowing that he is unlikely to outrun the cultist, 
chooses to pretend that he is under the cultist’s 
command; the player has an idea of her own…
 Harvey’s action:
Harvey feigns being under the cultist’s command 
as his enemy approaches. Harvey’s player then asks if 
perhaps the train is pulling in at that moment? The 
Keeper hadn’t previously remarked upon the train 
and decides to allow a Luck roll to determine the 
situation. Harvey’s Luck roll is a success and the train 
is just pulling in as the cultist reaches to take the case 
from him. Harvey seizes the opportunity to push the 
cultist in front of the train, using the briefcase.
This action will require a successful fighting 
maneuver. The Keeper loves the idea and grants 
Harvey a bonus die for his clever manipulation of 
the situation. The cultist tries to take the bag, and the 
Keeper decides that his goal is to spin Harvey round 
and throw him before the train! Both sides are making 
a fighting maneuver. Harvey will take one penalty die 
because his Build is 1 point lower than the cultist’s. 
This cancels out the bonus die awarded by the Keeper.
08 is rolled for Harvey’s Fighting (Brawl) skill—a 
Hard success. 23 is rolled for the cultist’s Fighting 
(Brawl) skill—a Regular success.
Harvey keeps hold of the case and pushes the 
cultist in front of the train; the Keeper doesn’t bother 
rolling for damage!
Harvey goes on vacation to Innsmouth and en -
counters a deep one while exploring the caves under 
Darke’s Travelling Circus of Earthly Delights. A man 
of action, Harvey successfully clubs the deep one for 
5 points of damage. The deep one has tough, leathery 
skin and scales, giving it 1 point of natural armor. 
The Keeper deducts 1 from the damage, thus Har -
vey’s strike only does a total of 4 damage.
The deep one is none too happy and advances on 
Harvey, its needle sharp teeth glinting in the beam of 
Harvey’s flashlight…
Armor Examples:
Heavy leather jacket 1 point
WWI helmet 2 points
1" Hardwood 3 points
Present U.S. Helmet 5 points
Heavy Kevlar Vest 8 points
Military Body Armor 12 points
1.5" bulletproof glass 15 points
1" Steel plate 19 points
Large sand bag 20 points

===== PDF page index 124 (rulebook p.124) =====
113 
chapter 6: combat
Firearm Attack Modifiers
Once the difficulty level of a firearms attack has been set, all other 
factors that lend a distinct advantage or disadvantage are taken 
into account. Some options follow, but others may occur to you 
during play. Modifiers grant either a bonus die or a penalty die.
Diving for Cover (Penalty die)
A target that is aware of being fired upon may react by diving 
for cover. This may mean jumping behind a physical barrier, 
throwing oneself to the floor, or ducking and diving at speed 
in an attempt to present a more difficult target.
Diving for cover requires a Dodge roll. If this is successful, 
the target presents a more difficult target and the attacker 
gets one penalty die.
Diving for cover is a desperate response to a desperate 
situation. A character that opts to dive for cover forfeits their 
next attack (regardless of whether they were successful or 
not). If they have already used their attack this round, they 
forfeit their attack in the following round. The only option 
available to a character that has dived for cover, until their 
next attack, is to dodge further attacks. If an individual 
with multiple attacks dives for cover, they forfeit all of their 
attacks, not just a single attack.
Cover and Concealment (Penalty die)
The degree of protection offered by cover is at the Keeper’s 
discretion; a wooden fence may not stop a bullet, but it 
does obscure the target, making the shot more difficult. 
Concealment of at least half of the target adds one penalty 
die to a firearms attack. 
A target that breaks cover even briefly (to fire shots for 
example) may be targeted by another character—if that 
character is holding his or her turn.
Point-Blank Range (Bonus die)
If the target is at point-blank range—within a fifth of the 
shooter’s DEX in feet—the attacker gains a bonus die.
An attacker that is using a firearm at point-blank range 
may be targeted by melee attacks and could be disarmed 
with a successful fighting maneuver on their opponent’s 
turn. A target may not fight back against or dodge a Firearm 
attack as they can a Fighting attack.
Aiming (Bonus die)
The intention to take careful aim must be declared on the 
character’s turn in the order of combat. The shot is taken on 
the same turn in the order of combat on the following round. 
If no other actions are taken before the shot is fired, the 
attacker gains one bonus die. If the aiming character takes 
damage or moves while aiming, the advantage of aiming is 
lost. Only one bonus die may be gained by aiming.
Fast-Moving Targets (Penalty die)
A target that is moving at full speed (MOV 8 or more) is 
hard to hit; apply one penalty die. 
Target Size (Bonus or Penalty die)
Smaller targets are harder to hit. If the target is Build –2 or 
smaller, apply one penalty die.
Larger targets are easier to hit. If the target is Build 4 or 
larger, apply one bonus die. 
Reloading Firearms (possible Penalty die)
It takes one combat round to load two shells into any 
handgun, rifle or shotgun. Allow one round to exchange a 
clip. Allow two rounds to change a machine gun belt.
In a round, it is possible to put one round in a chamber 
and get that shot off with one penalty die.
Handguns, Multiple Shots (Penalty die)
Many handguns are capable of firing 2 or 3 shots per round. 
Firing one shot allows for a more careful aim and steadying 
of the weapon. Firing more than one shot places speed above 
accuracy. When firing two or three shots in one round, roll for 
each shot individually, with all shots receiving one penalty die. 
Firing into Melee Combat
Combatants in melee combat are constantly on the move 
and may obscure one another. One penalty die is applied 
Harvey shoots at the Deep One.
Harvey is shooting a single shot from his pistol at a 
target at normal range, so the difficulty level is Regu-
lar. On the next round he fires three shots. Harvey’s 
player rolls for each shot (at Regular difficulty), ap -
plying a penalty die to each roll.
===== PDF page index 125 (rulebook p.125) =====
114 
Call of Cthulhu
when targeting a combatant involved in melee combat. A 
fumble indicates an ally has been hit. If multiple allies are 
in the line of fire, the one with the lowest Luck score is hit.
Automatic Fire
If using automatic fire an attacker can make one pull of 
the trigger in one combat round. The automatic weapon 
will then continue firing until the trigger is released or the 
ammunition is expended (called full auto). Some weapons 
are limited to fire a burst (i.e. 2 or 3 bullets) rather than full 
auto, while others may be switched to fire semi-automatic 
(single bullets), and/or burst or full auto.
For full auto:  the player declares the number of rounds 
(bullets) to be fired, which may be any number up to the 
capacity of the gun before rolling the dice. Due to the recoil 
of automatic weapons, it is very hard to place a high number 
of rounds in a single target. To simulate this, the number of 
bullets fired is divided into a series of volleys, with an attack 
roll made for each volley.
A volley is a number of bullets up to or equal to the 
firer’s Submachine Gun (SMG) or Machine Gun (MG) skill  
divided by 10 and rounded down: simply read the tens digit 
of the skill value. Regardless of skill, a full auto volley is  
never fewer than 3 bullets. For example: a character with 
Firearms (SMG) 47% would fire four bullets in a volley. 
A character can fire full auto (multiple volleys) in a single 
round until their ammunition runs out, although the 
chances of hitting reduce after the first volley has been fired.
For burst fire: one pull of the trigger fires 2 or 3 bullets, this 
being considered the best combination of accuracy and con-
servation of ammunition. This is simply treated as a volley of 
2 or 3 shots (depending on the firearm; the user’s skill plays 
no role in determining the number of bullets).
When firing semi-automatic ( ie. multiple single shots): 
apply a penalty die to each shot, making a skill roll for each 
bullet fired, just as when firing multiple rounds from a hand-
gun see Handguns, Multiple Shots (page 113).
Rolling to hit with automatic fire:
First attack roll: apply the usual rules for a firearms attack 
roll (set difficulty by range and then apply any modifiers).
Second and further attack rolls: add one penalty die (or re-
move a bonus die) for each additional attack roll. If this would 
Sometimes taking cover is more advantageous than fighting back.
===== PDF page index 126 (rulebook p.126) =====
115 
chapter 6: combat
Harvey is investigating the disappearance of his old friend, Nott. He hears a strange sound coming from an upstairs room, pulls 
out his gun (.38 revolver), and cautiously opens the door. Peering inside, Harvey sees a shape crouching in the semidarkness—he 
wonders if it is human or animal. Harvey calls out, “Stop where you are. I’m armed!” Baring teeth and hissing, the thing rears 
up and charges at Harvey, who lets off a shot, and the Keeper begins a combat round. Sanity rolls would have to be made for 
encountering these monsters, but this will be explained in a later chapter—for now let’s accept that Harvey remains steadfast.
Harvey: DEX 55
 Firearms (Handgun) skill: 20 (Regular) / 10 (Hard) / 4 (Extreme)
 Dodge skill: 27 (Regular) / 13 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
 Damage Bonus: none
 Build: 0 
 Hit points: 15
Monster: DEX 60     
 Fighting (Brawl) skill: 40 (Regular) / 20 (Hard) / 8 (Extreme)
 Dodge skill: 30 (Regular) / 15 (Hard) / 6 (Extreme)
 Damage Bonus: none
 Build: 0
 Hit points: 14
Round one:
Harvey has already announced he is firing and will do so on DEX 105 (DEX+50) since his gun was readied (see 
Firearms and the DEX Order , page 112). The creature goes second with its DEX of 60. Without a readied firearm, 
Harvey would have acted after the creature.
Harvey’s action:
Harvey’s handgun can fire up to three shots each round, but he decides to fire only one steady shot to maximize his 
chance of hitting. As the target is within the base range of the handgun, Harvey requires a Regular level of success to 
hit. This shot is taken at point-blank range, so he gets a bonus die on the attack roll (see Point-Blank Range, page 113). 
Harvey’s Handgun skill is 20%, and he hits with a Regular success (rolling a possible 58 or 18). The revolver does 1D10 
damage, blowing a chunk out of the creature (5 points of damage).
Monster’s action:
Now that it is upon him, Harvey can clearly see the creature is not human at all, but more dog-like. It attacks him 
with its clawed forelimbs. Harvey opts to dodge the attack. 
The Keeper rolls 31 for the creature’s attack, using its Fighting skill of 40—a success. 
Harvey’s player rolls 12 (under half his skill—a Hard success) for his dodge, and avoids the blow.
Round two: 
Harvey acts first again, as his pistol is readied.
Harvey’s action:
Harvey fires off three shots in rapid succession. The range is point-blank, so Harvey gains a bonus die on each shot, 
but this is negated by the penalty die on each shot for firing multiple shots in one round from a handgun (see Handguns,  
Multiple Shots page 113).
Three dice rolls are made in turn, one for each of Harvey’s shots (each requiring a Regular level of success): 04, 27 and 
92. Two of the shots miss, but the first is an Extreme success. The Extreme success is an impale, so the damage is 1D10 
+ 10. The thing collapses.
Monster’s action:
It is dead or dying and can take no action.
Round three: 
Before Harvey can check if the creature is dead, he sees two more lurking in the shadows at the far side of the room.
Harvey’s action:
Harvey lifts his gun to fire again. Picking his target with care, he spends a whole round aiming, and gains a bonus 
die on the shot (see Aiming, page 113). 
Monster’s action:
The creatures appear to be feeding on something, heedless of the recent deafening gunshots, and are ignoring Harvey. 
Round four: 
Harvey’s action:
Harvey fires on DEX 105, after spending a round aiming. The nearest creature is mostly concealed by an overturned 
table. The table looks flimsy so Harvey chooses to shoot through it. The range is around 20 feet, beyond point-blank, but 
within the base range of the revolver (15 yards), so the difficulty level of the shot is Regular. Continued...  
===== PDF page index 127 (rulebook p.127) =====
116 
Call of Cthulhu
incur three penalty dice, stick with two penalty dice and raise 
the difficulty level by one step (from Normal to Hard, Hard to 
Extreme, Extreme to Critical, or Critical to impossible).
The attacker must make a fresh attack roll for each volley 
(or burst) of shots or whenever they select a new target.
All targets should be within a reasonable arc of fire (around 
a sixty-degree arc). Ammunition is expended when moving 
between targets (one bullet per meter/yard). This is simply 
additional wasted ammunition, and for convenience is not 
factored into volley size, attack rolls, or the quantity of shots 
that can be made before incurring penalty dice. 
Resolving each attack roll:
T If the attack roll is successful: half of the shots fired 
hit the target—roll damage for half of the shots 
(round down, minimum of one). Subtract any armor 
from each shot.
T If the attack roll is an Extreme success: all shots fired 
hit the target, the first half (round down, minimum 
of one) of which impale. Subtract any armor from 
each shot. If the difficulty level of the shot was Ex -
treme, the best possible result is a successful hit and 
not an impale.
The creature is partially concealed, so Harvey 
takes one penalty die (see Cover and Concealment, 
page 113), which is negated by the bonus die he gets 
for aiming.
Harvey makes one attack roll for the shot and 
scores a Hard success with a roll of 09. 1D10 is rolled 
for 7 points of damage, which is reduced by 2 points 
for the armor rating of the table, giving 5 damage.
Monster’s action:
Startled by the proximity of the shot, both creatures 
realize the danger and bound for the nearby window.
Round five: 
Harvey runs to the window and empties his 
gun at the fleeing creatures. The Keeper decides that 
Harvey will get one shot at normal range. That’s 
Harvey’s sixth shot and his revolver is empty. 
Round six:
Harvey’s action:
Harvey loads one bullet and fires it on the same 
round at the fleeing creature before it disappears from 
sight. The shot is at very long range (40 yards) so the 
difficulty level is Extreme (see Range and Firearms 
Difficulty Levels, page 112). A penalty die is added 
because Harvey is loading and firing a shot on the same 
round (see Reloading Firearms, page 113). Harvey’s 
player cheers as she rolls 01 and 01 with the penalty 
dice, giving a final result of 01! A critical at very long 
range is an impale delivering 1D10 + 10 damage that 
drops one of the creatures in its tracks. 
Monster’s action:
The remaining creature escapes unharmed.
Harvey turns and sees the gored corpse of his old 
friend Nott lying at his feet, then wanders over to 
check that the first creature is indeed dead.
Tommy guns aren't always useful against the Mythos.
A shooter with a skill of 63%, firing a full auto 
(multiple volleys) at a single target at normal range, 
makes one attack roll for each volley of 6 shots. The 
first volley requires a Regular success. The second 
volley of 6 bullets incurs a penalty die, as this is the 
second attack roll (for shots 7-12), and the third 
volley takes two penalty dice (for shots 13-18).
If the shooter had announced they were firing a 
fourth volley then the attack roll would incur two 
penalty dice, and the difficulty level (for shots 19-24) 
would increase to Hard.
Alternatively, if the same shooter fired just 12 
shots, dividing them equally between three targets (4 
shots at each) at normal range, the first attack roll 
would be for the 4 shots at the first target. The next 
4 shots at the second target would require a second 
attack roll, with one penalty die, followed by a further 
attack roll for the 4 shots at the third target, this time 
with two penalty dice. In this case the attacker has 
chosen to fire three partial volleys of 4 shots (rather 
than the full 6-shot volleys) to conserve ammunition.
===== PDF page index 128 (rulebook p.128) =====
117 
chapter 6: combat
For example: Harvey and his two friends, Rodger and Cecil, turn up to a prearranged meeting place in an old warehouse. 
Suddenly a gangster appears from the shadows, bringing a tommy gun to bear, and opens fire on the investigators, 
initiating a combat round. 
Gangster: DEX 50 
Firearms (Submachine gun) skill: 40 (Regular) / 20 (Hard) / 8 (Extreme)
Fighting (Brawl) skill: 30 (Regular) / 15 (Hard) / 6 (Extreme)
Dodge skill: 25 (Regular) / 12 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
Damage Bonus: 1D4
Hit points: 13
Harvey: DEX 55 
Fighting (Brawl) skill: 25 (Regular) / 12 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
Dodge skill: 27 (Regular) / 13 (Hard) / 5 (Extreme)
Damage Bonus: none
Hit points: 15
Rodger: DEX 70 
Fighting (Brawl) skill: 40 (Regular) / 20 (Hard) / 8 (Extreme)
Dodge skill: 42 (Regular) / 21 (Hard) / 8 (Extreme)
Damage Bonus: 1D4
Hit points: 14
Round one:
The gangster goes first, firing on his DEX +50 for using a readied firearm. 
The gangster’s action:
One-tenth of the gangster’s SMG skill is 4, so he is able to fire volleys of 4 rounds. He chooses to fire 4 shots at each of 
the three investigators (3 volleys, 12 shots in total). Harvey and Cecil dive for cover, but Rodger pulls a pistol and stands 
his ground. Harvey makes a Dodge roll, but Cecil fails. The Keeper rules that the investigators are each 3 meters apart; 
the gangster wastes 6 extra rounds moving between his three targets (his ammunition is reduced by a total of 18 shots 
this round).
The gangster has a Submachine Gun skill of 40%. The targets are within normal range, so the difficulty level is 
Regular. The gangster has a penalty die when shooting at Harvey because he successfully dived for cover (see Diving for 
Cover, page 113). Continued...
A firefight breaks out in the warehouse between a gangster and the investigators.
===== PDF page index 129 (rulebook p.129) =====
118 
Call of Cthulhu
Malfunctions
Firearms are prone to jamming or misfiring. With any 
attack roll result equal to or higher than the firing weapon’s 
malfunction number (see Table XVII: Weapons, pages 401-
405), the shooter does not merely miss—his or her weapon 
does not fire. If the weapon is a revolver, break-open gun, or 
bolt-action rifle, the problem is merely a dud round. If the 
weapon is lever-action, the malfunction is a jam. Fixing a 
jam takes 1D6 combat rounds, plus a successful Mechanical 
Repair roll or Firearms skill roll. The user can keep trying 
once per round until succeeding. If the roll is also a fumble, 
the Keeper may choose whether the gun malfunctions or if 
some other outcome occurs, such as hitting an ally or the 
wielder injuring themselves in some way.
The Keeper rolls 33 or 43 (with the penalty die for diving for cover) to hit Harvey—a miss.
 Switching to the second target, the Keeper rolls 04 or 04 (with one penalty die for it being the gangster’s second attack 
roll this round) to hit Cecil—an Extreme success, indicating that all the shots hit and that half of them impaled. The 
Keeper makes two rolls of 1D10+2 plus two rolls of 12+1D10+2, totaling 45 points of damage. Cecil is killed outright.
The Keeper rolls the gangster’s third attack with two penalty dice and misses Rodger. 
Harvey’s action:
Harvey dived for cover and so forfeits his next action, which means that there is nothing he can do at present. Harvey 
has taken cover behind a car.
Rodger’s action:
Rodger lets off a shot but misses the gangster.
Round two:
The gangster still has his submachine gun pointing in the investigators’ direction, but Rodger now has a readied pistol 
(DEX 70+50), which means Rodger acts first, followed by the gangster, and then Harvey, still behind the cover of the 
nearby car.
Rodger’s action:
Rodger fires a single shot but misses.
The gangster’s action:
The gangster fires 16 shots at the two investigators (4 volleys, 8 bullets at each investigator). The targets are within 
base range, so the difficulty level is Regular. Harvey remains behind the car, giving him partial cover, so the gangster 
will get an additional penalty die on his attacks on Harvey. Rodger dives for cover and fails. The Keeper rules that the 
two investigators are now 10 meters apart; the gangster will waste 10 extra rounds moving between his targets (his 
ammunition is reduced by a total of 26 shots this round, leaving 6 shots in his 50-round drum).
The Keeper rolls 87 to hit Rodger with his first volley of 4 bullets: a miss. He then makes a second attack roll for the 
second volley of 4 bullets, taking one penalty die. He rolls 92 and 72: another miss. 
The gangster then switches targets to Harvey and makes a third attack roll. This time he should have three penalty 
dice, two for making a third attack roll and one for Harvey having partial cover. As the number of penalty dice is capped 
at two, he rolls two penalty dice and the difficulty level for the attack is raised by one step to Hard. He rolls 02, 12 and 
12. 12 is a Hard success, so half the four bullets hit. The Keeper rolls 1D10 + 2  for each hit, giving a total of 6 points of 
damage. The Keeper narrates this, stating that two bullets skim the hood of the car and strike Harvey in the shoulder. 
On his final volley of 4 shots at Harvey, the gangster would gain another penalty die, but as he is already on two 
penalty dice the difficulty level is raised once more to Extreme. This time the Keeper rolls 08, 38 and 98. 98 is both a 
fumble and a malfunction (see Malfunctions, below). The Keeper describes it as a malfunction—the gun jams.
Harvey’s action:
Harvey breaks cover, runs in and punches the gangster. The gangster dodges and Harvey misses.
Round three:
Rodger would normally go first this round with his readied pistol but, as he dived for cover in the last round, he loses 
his next action. Harvey is fighting the gangster in hand-to-hand combat. The machine gun is jammed, but the gangster 
could still strike Harvey with it.
The gangster’s action:
Realizing his gun is jammed, the gangster flees the scene.
Harvey’s action:
Harvey holds his bleeding side and looks in disbelief at Rodger! 
Rodger’s action:
Rodger can do nothing but look aghast as the gangster runs away. 
===== PDF page index 130 (rulebook p.130) =====
119 
chapter 6: combat
Wounds and 
Healing
I think they mean to get rid of me because of what 
I have discovered. There is a great black stone 
with unknown hieroglyphics half worn away 
which I found in the woods on Round Hill, east of 
here; and after I took it home everything became 
different. If they think I suspect too much they will 
either kill me or take me off the earth to where 
they come from. They like to take away men of 
learning once in a while, to keep informed on the 
state of things in the human world.
—H.P . Lovecraft, The Whisperer In Darkness
Descriptions of injuries should be appropriate 
to the type and degree of damage received. Thus 
the investigator is not merely shot, but shot in 
one arm or the other; likewise a fall might mean 
the investigator has sprained an ankle, or now 
has a lump the back of her skull, as well as the 
hit point loss.
Keepers should describe the effects of 
damage and try to avoid simply saying, “Y ou 
lost 3 hit points. ”
Tracking Damage
The number of hit points of damage inflicted 
by an attack can be used to differentiate between 
regular damage and major wounds. Someone beaten 
unconscious by punches (each doing a small amount 
of damage) may awaken the next day battered and bruised but 
able to act. However, someone who takes the same total amount 
of harm in a single attack, such as a gunshot, might be out of 
action for a week or more before the slow healing process even 
begins. A punch is likely to result in regular damage, whereas a 
gunshot is more likely to inflict a major wound.
If the damage from a single attack is:
T Less than half the character’s maximum hit points, it 
is regular damage.
T Equal to or more than half the character’s maximum 
hit points, it is a Major Wound.
T More than the character’s maximum hit points, the 
result is death.
Regular Damage: The Effects 
Regular damage is the result of any single attack that deals 
damage equal to less than half the character’s maximum hit 
points in a single blow. It has no significant effect on the 
character until current hit points are reduced to zero, when 
the character will become unconscious. A character cannot 
die as a result of regular damage.
A Summary of  
Firearms Modifiers:  
Bonus and Penalty dice
Difficulty Level Bonus Die Penalty Die
Regular: Normal 
range
Aiming for 1 round Target diving for 
cover
Hard: Long range Point blank Fast-moving target 
(MOV 8+)
Extreme: Very long 
range
Large target (Build 4+) Partial (50%+) 
concealment
Small target (Build 
–2)
Multiple handgun 
shots
Loading and firing 
one shot in a single 
round
Firing into melee

===== PDF page index 131 (rulebook p.131) =====
120 
Call of Cthulhu
Major Wound: The Effects 
A Major Wound results when an attack delivers an amount 
of damage equal to or greater than half of the character’s 
maximum hit points in a single attack. A character that has 
received a major wound may die if their current hit points 
are reduced to zero.
When a character takes a major wound:
T Tick the Major Wound box. 
T The character immediately falls prone. 
T Make a successful CON roll to avoid the character 
falling unconscious.
T If current hit points fall to zero while the Major 
Wound box is ticked, the character is dying (see 
Dying, below).
Zero Hit Points: The Effects
Cumulative damage ceases to be tracked once current hit 
points have fallen to zero; do not record negative hit points. 
On zero hit points the character is unconscious. 
Further damage is generally ignored, but any sincere 
attempt to kill an unconscious character should succeed.
Zero hit points can indicate one of three conditions (akin 
to the triage model):
T If only regular damage has been taken, the character 
does not die and will heal in time.
T If the character has taken a Major Wound, the char-
acter will soon die unless First Aid is administered 
(see Dying). If an uninjured character takes a wound 
that is equal to their maximum hit points, this would 
be a major wound.
T If an amount of damage greater than the character’s 
maximum hit points is taken in one attack then 
death is inevitable.
First Aid
To be effective, First Aid must be delivered within one hour, in 
which case it grants 1 hit point recovery. It may be attempted 
once, with subsequent attempts constituting a Pushed roll. 
Two people can work together to administer First Aid, with 
a success granted if either one of them rolls a success. An 
exception is allowed when treating a dying character (see 
Dying, below), wherein the best that can be achieved with 
First Aid is to temporarily stabilize the patient.
Medicine
Treatment of injuries using the Medicine skill takes a 
minimum of one hour and can be delivered any time after 
damage is taken. If this is not performed on the same day, 
the difficulty level is increased (requiring a Hard success). 
A person treated successfully with Medicine recovers 1D3 
hit points (in addition to any First Aid they have received), 
except in the case of a dying character (see Dying, below), 
who must initially receive successful First Aid, after which 
they must be stabilized using Medicine (see Major Wound 
Recovery, page 121).
Dying
A character is dying when their hit points are reduced to 
zero and they have also sustained a Major Wound. Record 
the Current Hit Points as "0" and check the “Dying” box.
The character immediately falls unconscious. The player 
must make a CON roll at the end of the next round and 
every round thereafter; if one of these CON rolls fails, the 
character dies immediately. Only the First Aid skill can be 
used to stabilize a dying character. Medicine cannot be used 
to stabilize a dying character (see Chapter 4: Skills).
The use of First Aid to stabilize a dying character grants 
1 temporary hit point, and it must be followed up with a 
successful Medicine skill roll. A dying character that has 
been stabilized with First Aid (on 1 temporary hit point) 
should make a CON roll at the end of each hour; a failure 
indicates the patient's condition has deteriorated: they lose 
Harvey has 15 hit points. Damage of 8 or more will 
inflict a Major Wound. 
Harvey is attacked by a mad cultist and, over the 
course of the fight, takes 3 damage, then 8 damage. 
His current hit points are down to 4. The Major 
Wound knocks him to the floor. He is required to 
make a CON roll for the Major Wound and does so 
successfully, remaining conscious. 
"Argh...I can't reach it"
===== PDF page index 132 (rulebook p.132) =====
121 
chapter 6: combat
the temporary hit point and revert to the start of the Dying 
process, in need of First Aid and requiring a CON roll at the 
end of each round. 
The Medicine skill should be used to treat a dying 
character after he or she has been stabilized with First Aid. 
After a successful Medicine roll, uncheck the “dying” box 
on the investigator sheet and increase hit points by 1D3. A 
recovery roll (see Major Wound Recovery) should be made 
at the end of each further week of care/convalescence.
Regular Damage Recovery
Recovering from regular damage is relatively fast. If the 
character has not sustained a major wound (the major wound 
box is unchecked) the character recovers 1 hit point per day.
Major Wound Recovery
A CON roll should be made at the end of each week of game 
time that the Major Wound box is ticked,
T If the CON roll is failed, no recovery takes place that 
week. On a success, 1D3 hit points are recovered.
T On an Extreme success, 2D3 hit points are recovered.
T Add a bonus die: If the character has complete rest 
in a comfortable environment.
T Add a bonus die:  If the character receives effective 
medical care. The care giver with the highest Medicine 
skill should make one Medicine skill roll at the end of 
the week (before the patient’s CON roll is made).
T Add a penalty die:  If the character is in a poor en -
vironment and is unable to take sufficient rest, and/
or a fumble was rolled on their doctor’s (or nurse’s) 
Medicine skill roll.
There are two ways to heal a major wound (i.e. erase the 
major wound marker). Firstly, when the character rolls an 
Extreme success for their recovery (CON roll). Secondly, 
any time their current hit points have recovered to half (or 
more than half  of their full hit point total.
If the roll is a fumble, a lasting injury, complication, or 
worse condition results. Rather than rolling for a random 
complication, the Keeper is encouraged to pick something 
that relates to the nature of the character’s injuries ( e.g. 
permanent limp, blindness in one eye, missing fingers, 
loss of a limb, scarred face, etc.) and make an entry in the 
investigator’s backstory (under Wounds and Scars).
Continuing the previous example: Harvey suffers a 
further 5 damage. His current hit points fall to zero 
and, since he has taken a Major Wound (8 points 
of damage in a single attack), he is now dying; his 
player checks the “dying” box and marks hit points as 
“0”. The following round a companion attempts First 
Aid and fails. Harvey’s CON roll is successful and 
he survives another round. The companion attempts 
First Aid again, this time he is successful. Harvey 
gains 1 hit point and is stabilized (only requiring a 
CON roll per hour) and is taken quickly to a hospital 
where he receives professional medical assistance. 
The dying tick is removed and Harvey gains 2 hit 
points (1D3 from Medicine skill roll). After a week of 
rest Harvey makes a recovery roll (see below).
In another incident, Harvey (who has a total of 
15 hit points) takes 4 damage, then 6, then 7. He 
has taken a total of 17 damage, but as negative hit 
points are not recorded his current hit points now 
equal zero. He has only taken regular damage (none 
of the attacks, in themselves, cost more than half 
of Harvey’s maximum hit points) and so Harvey 
recovers one hit point per day and is back to full 
health after 15 days.
Harvey is recovering in hospital after almost dying (see 
the example for Dying, to the left). He has the best of 
care and complete rest, so gains two bonus dice to his 
recovery roll. This roll gives a Hard success, granting 
the recovery of 3 hit points (1D3). Harvey is now well 
enough to return home. He does some light work on 
the second week, (thus he has not rested) and, as he is 
no longer under medical care, his recovery roll gets no 
bonus dice. This time he rolls a failure; no recovery. On 
the third week he realizes that he needs to take it easy 
and asks a friendly nurse to look in on him as he rests 
in bed; this grants a bonus die. A Medicine roll is made 
for the nurse’s care (a success), and so he gains a second 
Bonus die. He rolls an Extreme success on his recovery 
roll at the end of week three. He recovers another 5 hit 
points (2D3) and erases the major wound marker. His 
current hit points now stand at 8. He regains one more 
hit point each day, and in seven more days he is fully 
healed to his maximum of 15 hit points.
 Another example: Cecil is on an expedition in the 
jungles of South America. He suffers a major wound 
during a fight, receiving a terrible bite to his left arm. 
A friend administers First Aid, but there is nowhere 
for Cecil to rest properly and, anyway, he and his 
companions are working to a deadline to prevent a 
cult summoning their dark god. At the end of a week 
he attempts his recovery roll with one penalty die, 
rolling a fumble. The Keeper decides the wound has 
become infected and that the lower arm is swollen 
and painful; medical treatment is required promptly 
or the infection may kill him. Cecil looks at his com-
panions; one of them is going to have to attempt an 
amputation!
===== PDF page index 133 (rulebook p.133) =====
122 
Call of Cthulhu

===== PDF page index 134 (rulebook p.134) =====
123 
chapter 6: combat
Unconsciousness and Death
Call of Cthulhu is a horror game and sometimes it may be 
more terrifying for an investigator to stay conscious; if the 
Keeper wishes, a character may be incapacitated rather than 
fully unconscious. Equally, final death does not have to occur 
instantaneously, and the light in a character’s eyes might not 
go out until after a particularly dramatic moment or once their 
final words have been uttered (at the Keeper’s discretion).
Other Forms of Damage
Often the Keeper will be forced to make a judgment for the 
amount of damage caused by some random event such as 
dropping a TV set on someone’s foot, running into a doorpost, 
or falling down an elevator shaft. Whatever the cause, consider 
the likely injury and rate it against the left-hand column on 
Table III: Other Forms of Damage (page 124).
Don’t feel compelled to limit yourself to the amounts of 
damage listed—you wish you may increase or decrease the 
amounts subject to the circumstances of the situation. 
Each injury type is for one incident or one round; one 
round of being punched by one attacker, one bullet, one 
round of drowning, one round of being burned. The character 
will take further damage on each successive round that they 
are exposed to the source of the harm.
Spot Rules: Optional 
Rules for Combat
The main combat chapter contains all the rules you will need 
to run fight scenes in your game and you are advised to stick 
with these until you become accustomed to them. 
What follows are a collection of optional rules from which 
you can mix and match as you please. Y ou are not compelled 
to use them just because they are here. Some people prefer to 
make spontaneous judgments about each new situation based 
on its unique merits, while others prefer to have a strongly 
defined set of rules to play by. Y ou and your group should 
decide which you prefer.
Rolling for Initiative
If you prefer more variation in combat, ask everyone to 
make a DEX roll to determine the initiative order. Those 
who rolled an Extreme success will be first to act, followed by 
those who rolled a Hard success, then those with a Regular 
success, and finally those who failed the roll. 
If more than one character achieves the same level of 
success, give priority to those with the higher DEX value. If 
characters are still tied, use combat skill value to prioritize. 
Those that roll 01 (critical) on their DEX roll should gain 
a tactical advantage or bonus die on their first attack. Those 
that roll a fumble should forgo their first attack, perhaps 
dropping their weapon or tripping.
Once the initiative order has been determined, stick with 
it for the duration of that combat.
Note down each combatant in order, along with their 
level of success (for example "Brian, Fail"). That way if 
additional combatants join, they can make a DEX roll and 
be placed in the existing initiative order. This will also be 
useful if characters draw guns, as this will affect the timing 
of their action in the combat round. 
When using this optional rule, a character with a readied 
firearm may roll their DEX with a bonus die. If a character 
draws a firearm during the combat and has it readied at the 
start of a round, they may re-roll their DEX roll with a bonus 
die. If this results in a worse result than previously rolled, 
they may retain their previous place in the order.
Harvey fails a pushed Stealth roll as he attempts to 
follow someone through a fairground. As a conse -
quence the Keeper rules that he is struck by one of 
the moving fairground rides. There is no damage 
listed for fairground rides so he refers to the Other 
Forms of Damage table. The Keeper feels it would 
be likely to knock someone unconscious and chooses 
‘Severe’, rolling 1D10 damage.
Trips to the hospital will become routine for investigators.

===== PDF page index 135 (rulebook p.135) =====
124 
Call of Cthulhu
Table III:  
Other Forms of Damage
*Asphyxiation and Drowning: a CON roll should be made each round; once a CON roll is failed, damage is sustained 
each round thereafter until death or until the victim is able to breathe. If the character is in a state of physical exertion, 
a Hard success is required on the CON roll. Death occurs at 0 hit points (ignore the Major Wound rule).
**Poisons: an Extreme CON roll will halve damage from poisons. Poisons may cause a variety of additional symptoms 
including: stomach pains, vomiting, diarrhea, chills, sweats, cramps, jaundice, altered heart rate, impaired vision, 
convulsions, unconsciousness, and paralysis. It is up to the Keeper whether the symptoms permit the victim to act 
or not, or to act with a penalty die or an increased level of difficulty.
In certain circumstances, Keepers may allow a poison's effects to be shaken off if the CON roll is a critical success.
Injury Damage Examples
Minor: a person could survive 
numerous occurrences of this level 
of damage.
1D3 Punch, kick, head-butt, mild acid, breathing smoky atmosphere*, a 
thrown fist-size rock, falling (per 10 feet) onto soft swamp.
Moderate: might cause a major 
wound; it would take a few such 
attacks to kill.
1D6
Falling (per 10 feet) onto grass, club, strong acid, breathing water*, 
exposure to vacuum*, small caliber bullet, arrow, fire (burning 
torch).
Severe: likely to cause a major 
wound. One or two occurrences 
would render a person 
unconscious or dead.
1D10
.38 caliber bullet, falling (per 10 feet) onto concrete, axe, fire 
(flamethrower, running through a burning room), being 6 to 9 
yards from an exploding hand grenade or stick of dynamite, a mild 
poison**.
Deadly: the average person has a 
50% chance of dying. 2D10 Hit by a car at 30mph, being 3 to 6 yards from an exploding hand 
grenade or stick of dynamite, a strong poison**.
Terminal: outright death is likely. 4D10 Hit by a speeding car, being within 3 yards of an exploding hand 
grenade or stick of dynamite, a lethal poison**.
Splat: outright death almost 
certain. 8D10 Being involved in a high-speed head-on collision, being hit by a 
train.

===== PDF page index 136 (rulebook p.136) =====
125 
chapter 6: combat
Knock-Out Blows
The standard rules already allow for a target to be knocked 
unconscious: when an attack inflicts a Major Wound (an 
amount of damage equal to or greater than half the target’s 
hit points), the target must make a CON roll to remain 
conscious. Also a target that is reduced to zero hit points will 
fall unconscious automatically.
The standard rules require significant lasting damage, and 
we are accustomed to seeing characters routinely knocked 
out on TV and in films. Rather than suffering a concussion or 
fractured skull, these fictional characters awake later, rub their 
head, and carry on as if nothing happened.
If you wish to incorporate a movie-style knock-out rule 
into your game then treat this as a maneuver using blunt 
attacks (punch, club, rifle-butt, etc.) If the maneuver is 
successful, the opponent is rendered unconsciousness and 
suffers only 1 hit point of damage. Knock-out attacks may be 
used on any opponent with a skull or similar vulnerable spot 
(humans, deep ones, ghouls, and so on, but not a shoggoth).
Spending Luck to Remain Conscious
If you are using the optional rule for spending Luck points to 
alter rolls, Luck may be spent to remain conscious for a few 
extra rounds. Remaining conscious until the end of the current 
round costs 1 point of Luck. The cost doubles on successive 
rounds—2, 4, 8, and so on—and should be spent at the start of 
each round. This is a mixed blessing, as an active character may 
present a more attractive target for further damage.
Avoiding Nothing Happening When 
Both Sides Fail Their Fighting Skill Roll
Sometimes during melee combat, both sides simultaneously 
fail their Fighting skill rolls and nothing happens. One way 
to view this is that both sides are being equally ineffective at 
inflicting harm. An alternative point of view it is that dealing 
harm is relatively easy, and that the real skill lies in protecting 
oneself from harm during a fight. When taking the latter 
approach, failing a Fighting skill roll means that you have 
failed to protect yourself during the combat. Narratively you 
may have missed your target and punched a wall or moved 
the wrong way and into your opponent’s blow. There are 
many ways to get hurt during combat; your opponent’s fist is 
only one of them.
There are three solutions available to you:
T First use the default rule by which nothing happens 
when both sides fail.
T Second resolve the situation by breaking the tie in 
favor of the higher skill. 
T Third allow both sides to inflict damage as for a 
successful attack. The two sides have clashed during 
combat.
This rule is not applicable to ranged or firearm attacks.
Harvey wishes to knock out the security guard at the 
British Museum. Harvey picks up a fire extinguisher 
and successfully sneaks up and hits the guard on the 
back of the head with it. Referring to Striking the 
First Blow (Surprise) (see page 106) the Keeper de-
cides that because the target is completely unaware of 
the attack, it will be an automatic success. The guard 
takes 1 hit point of damage and is knocked out cold. 
 If Harvey had failed his Stealth roll, he would 
have attempted a fighting maneuver with the goal 
of knocking the guard out. The guard is a big fellow 
with Build 1, one above Harvey’s Build of zero, so 
Harvey takes one penalty die on the maneuver. 
Harvey rolls a Regular success and the guard fails 
to dodge, so Harvey succeeds in the maneuver. The 
guard is rendered unconscious.
Harvey (DEX 55) rolls 13—a Hard success. Colin (DEX 
60) rolls 84—a failure. The cultist (DEX 50) rolls 14—a 
Hard success. Harvey acts first, then the cultist, then Co-
lin. If the default system had been used, the order would 
have been Colin, Harvey and then the cultist. 
Another cultist arrives part way through the 
combat. The second cultist has DEX 50 and rolls 45—a 
Regular success. He slots into the initiative order after 
the first cultist. 
On a later round, Colin draws a gun and at the start 
of the following round he has a readied firearm, so he 
re-rolls his initiative with one bonus die, rolling a Hard 
success. This places him first in the order of initiative.
Harvey takes a major wound and fails his CON 
roll. He automatically falls prone, and should be -
come unconscious, but he spends 1 point of Luck to 
remain conscious till the end of the present round. 
At the start of the following round he spends 2 Luck 
points. At the start of the third round he spends 
4 Luck points. A total of 7 Luck points have been 
spent, at which point Harvey has reached safety. At 
the start of the fourth round Harvey doesn’t spend 
Luck points, and automatically falls unconscious.
Harvey is fighting a deep one. Harvey throws a punch 
and the deep one fights back with its clawed hand. 
Both roll a failure for their Fighting (Brawl) skill. 
They have clashed, both hurling blows at each other. 
Harvey inflicts 1D3 damage and the deep one inflicts 
1D6 + 1D4. 
===== PDF page index 137 (rulebook p.137) =====
126 
Call of Cthulhu
Concealed Damage
When you take an injury, do you know how close you are 
to death? This sense of uncertainty can be simulated if the 
Keeper notes down the points of damage an investigator 
receives without revealing a number to the player. Instead 
the Keeper only describes the injury to the player. Of course 
this is subjective and can be misleading; sometimes a minor 
injury can seem far worse than it is and vice versa. A cut 
to the head can look terrible; a little blood goes a long way, 
but it may only represent one or two points of damage. The 
Keeper can always call for a CON roll just to keep the player 
guessing whether they have received a major wound or not 
(of course the investigator would only fall unconscious if the 
wound really was a major wound). The Keeper can reveal the 
actual number of points of damage after the event.
Suppressing Fire 
The aim of suppressing fire is to make a group of targets 
"dive for cover," since targets that do so cannot return fire. 
The shooter does not nominate a specific target but declares 
that they are bringing suppressive fire upon a group. A group 
of targets might be all the people in one room (such as in a 
bank heist) or any group of people within the gun’s firing 
arc. Each target in that area then has the option to "dive for 
cover" without knowing if they will be specifically targeted 
or not. The intention is to simulate the panic that people 
might feel when fired upon.
Once those that wished to dive for cover have done so, 
the Keeper should determine the target or targets from the 
original group at random, including those that chose to 
dive for cover. Those that successfully dived for cover will of 
course be harder to hit.
Armor Revisited
Shotguns fire a mass of small pellets, each of which must 
pierce any armor. The damage for shotguns is rolled using a 
number of six-sided dice. Armor ratings are factored against 
every D6 when rolling shotgun damage. Thus, if an attack 
with a shotgun hits a target wearing a leather jacket (1 point 
of armor), that one point of armor is deducted from each 
and every damage die, reducing an attack that deals 4D6 
damage by 4 points.
Some forms of armor offer protection to specific parts 
of the body; for example, a helmet protects the head. The 
standard Call of Cthulhu combat rules do not use hit locations 
(see the Optional Hit Location rules below). In the general 
rough-and-tumble of a fist-fight or a fall from a window, it 
is credible that armoring specific parts of the body (such as 
the head) will reduce the overall damage received, and in 
the interest of simplicity and the flow of the game no further 
rolls need be made. 
However the case of a single specific attack (such as being 
shot) raises the question of whether the shot was to an area 
protected by armor. In the case of such an attack, a Luck roll 
is required. If the Luck roll is successful, the armor was hit 
and the damage is reduced by the armor value. If the Luck 
roll is failed, the attack hit an area not protected by armor. A 
character wearing armor that protects both head and torso 
gains a bonus die on their Luck roll for armor protection. 
A character wearing armor all over their body or 
possessing natural armor such as that of an elephant’s 
skin does not require a Luck roll; it applies in all cases. If a 
weakness is spotted in an enemy’s armor—a vulnerable spot, 
such as an open mouth or eye—that area may be targeted, 
and the Keeper should set an increased level of difficulty or 
penalty dice for the attempt.
Optional Hit Locations
Rather than using Luck to determine if an armored part 
of the body has been hit, roll 1D20 and consult Table IV: 
Optional Hit Locations (page 127).
Sights
Telescopic sights effectively double the base range when 
using firearms. If using sights with a .303 Lee Enfield rifle 
(base range of 110 yards), for example, the difficulty level 
would not be increased until the range exceeded 220 yards 
with Extreme range being from 440 to 880 yards. Sights are 
of no benefit at point-blank range.
A group of six investigators and four non-player char-
acter allies are trying to rescue a girl being held hostage 
by a cultist. The cultist is dragging the girl to a car, and 
lets off three shots in the direction of the investigators. 
The Keeper gives everyone a chance to dive for cover. 
Four of the investigators dive for cover (two are suc -
cessful, two fail); everyone else stands their ground. 
The Keeper allocates every investigator and non-player 
character a number from one to ten, then rolls 1D10 
three times to decide who is shot at. One non-player 
character, one investigator that stood his ground and 
one that dived for cover are targeted by the bullets. 
Each attack is then resolved using the usual rules.
Harvey is snooping around an alley when he is shot. 
The Keeper tells how Harvey hears the shot then feels 
the impact in his left leg, and looking down to see blood 
seeping into his trousers. A moment later the pain hits 
him. It’s bad, but Harvey’s player must decide whether 
to go on or get Harvey to a hospital. The Keeper doesn’t 
confirm whether it is a major wound or not, but asks 
for a CON roll anyway. Harvey’s player makes a suc-
cessful CON roll. Later on the Keeper confirms that is 
was not a major wound (only 4 hit points of damage).
===== PDF page index 138 (rulebook p.138) =====
127 
chapter 6: combat
Bracing
Bracing a firearm, such as using a bipod, tripod or a mounted 
weapon, effectively doubles the base range for the weapon. 
Where the weapon is mechanically braced to a structure 
(vehicle or building) the user gains a bonus die.
Movement During Combat
Combat is usually described narratively, so the distance 
between combatants is rarely measured precisely. It is more 
often expressed in approximate and subjective terms such 
as "arm’s reach," "close," "across the room," "away down the 
alley," etc. If it seems that distance should be an issue in a 
particular fight, the following rules should be used.
The maximum distance a character can move in one 
combat round is equal to their MOV rating multiplied by 
5, in yards. 
In the case of melee attacks, the attacker must get into 
melee range before attacking. 
T A character can move a number of yards equal to 
their MOV rate and attack normally.
T If the attacker moves up to their MOV rate multi -
plied by 5, they may make one melee attack at the 
end of the round.
In the case of firearms, shots can be taken by a moving 
character at any time in the round. 
T To take advantage of the +50 DEX for using a read-
ied firearm, the firearm must be used before any 
movement is made.
T A character can move up to a number of yards equal 
to their MOV rate and make their firearms attack (or 
attacks) normally on their usual DEX rank.
T If the attacker moves their MOV rate multiplied by 
5 in yards,  they must fire while running and so lack 
sufficient time to take a steady firing position, taking 
a penalty die to their attack roll(s). The shots will 
normally be taken on their usual turn in the DEX or-
der, but may be delayed if significant distance must 
be covered to reach a firing position (at the Keeper’s 
discretion).
Complete Concealment
If a target remains completely concealed for the whole round, 
an attacker may still take shots through the cover in the hope 
of hitting their target. The chance of hitting depends on the 
size of the area in which the target is taking cover; there is a 
great difference between hiding in a small garden shed and 
hiding in an aircraft hangar. The attacker is mostly using 
intuition to hit the target. If the hiding space is small, the 
Keeper should raise the difficulty level by only one step; if 
there is more space to hide in, raise it again or only allow a 
hit on a critical success, if at all.
Shooting at a Target Through Cover
In some instances of partial concealment, the attacker may 
choose to shoot through the cover in an attempt to hit 
the target. In this case add one penalty die (as for partial 
concealment) and apply an armor rating for the type of 
cover, for example a low brick wall could provide an armor 
rating of 10, whereas a thin wooden fence might only give 1 
point of protection (see Armor page 108). 
Point-Blank Revisited
The point-blank bonus die does not apply to long or 
cumbersome weapons such as rifles, full-length shotguns, 
and bows, as these are less easily brought to bear on a moving 
target at close range. Short-barreled shotguns (of the kind 
designed for home defense) or sawn-off shotguns do gain 
the point-blank bonus die.
Prone
A prone character is assumed to be lying flat on the ground.
T Kicking someone when they are down is easier; 
fighting attacks made against a prone character gain 
one bonus die.
Table IV:  
Optional Hit Locations
Die Roll Location
1–3 Right leg
4 — 6 Left leg
7 — 10 Abdomen
11 — 15 Chest
16 — 17 Right arm
18 — 19 Left arm
20 Head
Shooting through a high brick wall to target someone 
who is hiding behind it (complete concealment): raise 
the difficulty level by two steps and apply the wall’s 
armor rating of 10 to any successful attacks.
===== PDF page index 139 (rulebook p.139) =====
128 
Call of Cthulhu
T A character that is prone may stand up when they 
successfully dodge or fight back against an oppo -
nent. Alternatively, when it comes to their turn in 
the round, they may stand up and then take their 
action.
T Lying down provides a stable position from which 
to shoot; a prone character gets one bonus die when 
making a Firearms roll. 
T By lying flat on the floor you present a smaller target; 
those targeting a prone character with a firearm get 
one penalty die (ignore this if at point blank-range).
Poisons
Table III: Other Forms of Damage  (see page 124) covers 
mild, strong and lethal poisons in a simplified manner, and 
is likely to be all you need in the game. If you wish to focus 
on a specific type of poison and its effects, you may find this 
more detailed guide useful.
All poisons are divided into four bands: very mild, mild, 
strong and lethal. The bands indicate the deadliness of the 
poison, and assume a single dose (application, draft, bite or 
sting—depending on how the poison is administered). If 
multiple doses are received, the victim adds a penalty die to 
their CON roll.
The speed at which the poison acts is determined by the 
administration method and Keeper discretion. Fast-acting 
poisons begin to work within a single round (death from 
cyanide poisoning could be expected within a minute, for 
example). Slower poisons may take hours or even days to 
register their effects.
Individual poisons cause a range of different symptoms, 
including stomach pains, vomiting, diarrhea, chills, sweats, 
cramps, jaundice, altered heart rate, impaired vision, 
convulsions, unconsciousness and paralysis. It is up to the 
Keeper whether the symptoms permit the victim to act or 
not, or to act with a penalty die or an increased level of 
difficulty.
Alongside the various symptoms, poisons also cause 
physical damage.
T Very Mild poisons: no damage, only temporary 
unconsciousness.
T Mild poisons: 1D10.
T Strong poisons: 2D10.
T Lethal poisons: 4D10.
Those who succeed in rolling equal to or below a fifth of 
their CON suffer a lesser effect. Damage should be halved 
and symptoms reduced as decided by the Keeper. In certain 
circumstances, Keepers may allow a poison's effects to be 
shaken off if the CON roll is a critical success. A character 
might push the CON roll by attempting to purge the 
poison, through vomiting, amputation, or bloodletting, for 
example. Whether these things would work in real-life is 
questionable—what matters is the drama.

===== PDF page index 140 (rulebook p.140) =====
129 
chapter 6: combat
Sample Poisons
Poison Speed Effect (1 dose) Notes
Amanita (agaric 
mushrooms)
6 to 24 
hours
Violent stomach pains, vomiting, 
jaundice. 
1D10 damage
Responsible for 95% of fatalities from mushroom 
poisoning, the death cap mushroom being 
foremost.
Arsenic 30 minutes 
to 24 hours
Burning pain, vomiting, violent 
diarrhea.
4D10 damage
Arsenic poisoning was difficult to determine 
(hence its popularity as a tool for murder) until 
1836, when the Marsh Test was invented. 
Belladonna 
(deadly 
nightshade)
2 hours to 2 
days
Rapid heartbeat, impaired vision, 
convulsions.
4D10 damage
One of the most toxic plants in the world; 
consumption of 10-20 berries by an adult will 
probably cause death.
Black Widow 
Spider Venom 
(latrotoxin)
2 to 8 hours Chills, sweats, nausea.
1D10 damage
Rarely causes death if medical treatment is 
provided.
Chloroform 1 round Unconsciousness for 1 hour. 
No damage
Widely used an anesthetic in 1800-1900s, 
however a high strength toxic dose may cause 
death.
Cobra Venom 15 to 60 
minutes
Convulsions, respiratory failure.
4D10 damage
Contact with eyes will cause immediate irritation 
and, if untreated, blindness. If serum is available 
then major injury and death can be avoided.
Curare 1 round Muscular paralysis, respiratory 
failure.
4D10 damage.
Common name for poison administered to 
arrows in South America. Harmless if ingested—
only direct application via a skin wound results 
in paralysis.
Cyanide 1 to 15 
minutes
Dizziness, convulsions, fainting, 
death.
4D10 damage
Highly toxic—causes death if ingested as cyanide 
salt or inhaled through gas.
Rattlesnake 
Venom
6 to 24 
hours
Vomiting, violent spasms, yellowish 
vision.
2D10 damage
Venom destroys tissue, causing necrosis, 
although rarely fatal (especially if antidote is 
given within 1 to 2 hours).
Rohypnol 15 to 30 
minutes
Unconsciousness for 4-8 hours, 
possible amnesia.
No damage.
Odorless, colorless and only available in modern 
game settings.
Strychnine 10 to 20 
minutes
Violent muscle contractions, 
asphyxiation, death.
4D10 damage
Death within hours if medical treatment not 
provided.