
===== PDF page index 141 (rulebook p.141) =====

===== PDF page index 142 (rulebook p.142) =====

===== PDF page index 143 (rulebook p.143) =====
132 
Call of Cthulhu
ction scenes in films and books tend to fall 
into one of two categories: fights or chases. The 
extended chase in The Shadow over Innsmouth 
(quoted on the previous page) is one of the most 
dynamic and memorable action sequences in 
Lovecraft’s work. A chase scene should provide just as much 
drama and excitement as combat. 
A chase is more than a simple test of speed; a good chase 
is made up of a string of dramatic locations that challenge 
the characters as they race through them. The characters 
may begin in a crowded marketplace before moving to 
narrow alleys, then climbing a fire escape, breaking through 
a window, pursuing each other through an apartment as a 
family eat lunch, and so on.
The chase is played out in rounds (much like combat). 
As each character’s turn begins, the Keeper should describe 
the situation, then ask what actions the investigator is taking 
that round. Only then should the Keeper determine what 
dice rolls are required, the outcome of which should be 
incorporated into the story, perhaps changing the situation 
faced by the next player. 
These rules assume the fleeing character has an escape 
route. If a character is trapped then they must escape before 
a chase can ensue.
While some measure of gritty realism can be desirable, 
avoid becoming overly preoccupied with it. Always bear in 
mind that the aim is to create dramatic fiction, not to mirror 
real-world physics.
First, these rules will address a simple one-on-one chase. 
Later in this chapter, chases with multiple participants will 
be explored. These rules are intended for characters involved 
in any type of chase, whether running, swimming or flying, 
and for vehicles of any kind. 
The rules for chases are presented in five parts. 
Part 1: Establishing the chase: A method for gauging wheth-
er or not a chase needs to be played out in full. In cases where 
the fleeing character is determined to be fast enough to get 
away, the chase will go no further than Part 1.
Part 2: Cut to the chase: Provides the Keeper with a system 
for laying out a chase, positioning all of the participants, 
and deciding the order of play and number of actions each 
participant can make.
Part 3: Movement: This part covers the essential rules for 
movement and for dealing with the various hazards and 
barriers that might be encountered.
Part 4: Conflict: Provides rules for resolving what happens 
when characters and vehicles try to grab, strike or collide 
with each other. 
Part 5: Supplementary chase rules: Part 5 contains a selec -
tion of additional rules that complement parts 1 to 4. 
Part 1:  
Establishing the Chase
If the fleeing character is significantly faster than his or her 
opponent, escape is likely, leaving the pursuer far behind; the 
chase will be over almost as soon as it has begun. A single 
skill roll for each character is used to establish the chase, the 
result yielding one of two options:
G The fleeing character is faster than the pursuer, in 
which case it is assumed that the pursuer quickly 
falls behind and the chase is not played out. The 
Keeper simply describes how the pursuer loses their 
quarry in a way that fits the situation.
G The pursuer is fast enough to catch the fleeing char-
acter. If this is the case, the game picks up the action 
at the most exciting moment—the point where the 
pursuer is closing in on the fleeing character. 
Speed Roll
This roll adjusts each participant’s MOV rating for the 
duration of this chase. Every vehicle and character has a 
movement rating (MOV). A vehicle’s speed depends on a 
driver’s skill, while a character’s foot speed depends on their 
physical condition. 
Each participant in the chase makes a CON roll (if on 
foot or other self-propelled mode) to test his or her physical 
condition and endurance. Drivers make a Drive Auto roll 
(for vehicles) to test their handling of the vehicle.
G On a success: no change to MOV rating for the dura-
tion of this chase.
G On an extreme success: +1 to MOV rating for the 
duration of this chase.
G On a failure: –1 to MOV rating for the duration of 
this chase.
Compare Speeds
The fleeing character escapes if their adjusted MOV is 
higher than their pursuer. The Keeper is free to narrate a 
brief explanation of how this occurs, or to ask the players for 
suggestions. The chase is over and the Keeper should move 
the game on.
If the pursuer’s adjusted MOV rating is equal to or greater 
than that of the fleeing character, a chase is established, and 
the chase rules are bought into play. Proceed with Part 2: Cut 
to the chase.

===== PDF page index 144 (rulebook p.144) =====
133 
chapter 7: chases
Part 2: Cut to the Chase
If the fleeing character’s MOV was not high enough to 
lose the pursuer, the Keeper should move the action onto 
the point at which pursuer is just two locations behind, 
regardless of how the chase started. This short range serves 
to focus play on the exciting part of the chase. Whether the 
characters started next to each other or a mile apart, the 
aim is to “cut to the chase” . The fleeing character has already 
had one chance to escape using the speed roll. The Keeper 
would normally set the starting range to two locations, but 
may opt for a tenser chase by reducing it to one location in 
exceptional circumstances. It is advised not to set the range 
beyond two locations.
Locations
"Location" is a term used to denote a position in the chase. 
The locations do not need to be equally spaced; a locked 
door or a flight of stairs might separate two locations, while 
another might be a point on a stretch of open road. Locations 
divide the chase into narrative chunks, rather than being a 
set physical distance. For example, a hotel might be divided 
into multiple locations: revolving door, crowded foyer, stairs, 
lifts, corridors, restaurant, kitchens, bedrooms, offices, and 
so on.
If a chase takes place at the same time as a separate 
combat, the Keeper should ensure that the distance between 
locations is not excessive, otherwise you may end up with 
one group of characters running the length of a city block in 
the time it takes another investigator to smash a chair over 
a cultist’s head.
A chase is made up of a string of locations. The Keeper 
should keep careful track of which character is at which 
location. Depending on their speed, characters may move 
1 or more locations each round. Hazards and barriers (see 
following) are positioned between locations and may slow a 
character’s progress. 
Keeping Track of the Chase
When running a chase scene you may find the following 
method useful for tracking the various characters.
Take a blank sheet of paper or whiteboard. Draw a line 
of dots half an inch apart. Each dot represents one location. 
Label the first dot with a letter representing the pursuer. 
Then write a letter for the fleeing character two dots on from 
the pursuer, depending on the opening range (see Cut to the 
Chase). As characters move, simply cross out their marker 
and draw it on its new position. 
The Chase Round
Just as with combat, a chase takes place in rounds and the 
characters act in DEX order. A combat round and a chase 
round are interchangeable.
Harvey was caught sneaking around some farm build-
ings. The farmer spotted him at a distance and gave 
a shout; Harvey turned and fled. The Keeper asks for 
speed rolls. Harvey’s player makes an Extreme CON 
roll and Harvey’s MOV is raised from 6 to 7. The Keep-
er fails the CON roll for the farmer and the farmer’s 
MOV drops from 7 to 6. Harvey has the higher MOV 
and so he escapes. The Keeper tells how Harvey glances 
over his shoulder to see the farmer tripping over in the 
mud. No chase scene is played out. 
Alternatively, if Harvey failed his CON roll, the 
situation would be quite different. Harvey’s MOV 
would fall to 5 and the Keeper would establish the 
chase partway down the farm track with the farmer 
two locations behind Harvey.
An angry farmer is pursuing Harvey down a track. 
Following speed rolls, Harvey’s MOV is now 5; the 
farmer’s MOV is 6. The Keeper chooses to start the 
action with the farmer 2 locations behind and records 
the positions thus:
Start:
Farmer Harvey
Harvey flees from the farmer.

===== PDF page index 145 (rulebook p.145) =====
134 
Call of Cthulhu
Dexterity and the Order of Movement
The question of who gets the first opportunity to act can 
be an important issue in a chase. Determine the order of 
movement by ranking the characters’ DEX from highest to 
lowest. In the case of a draw, use an opposed DEX roll to 
decide who goes first.
Movement Actions
Each character gets a number of movement actions per 
round. Movement actions are used to move from one 
location to the next. Faster characters get more movement 
actions each round than slower characters.
Every character and vehicle gets one movement action 
by default. To this is added the difference between their 
movement rating (MOV) and the movement rating of the 
slowest participant in the chase. Thus the slowest participant 
will always have one movement action; someone with a MOV 
that is 1 above the slowest participant will have 2 movement 
actions, someone with a MOV that is 2 above the slowest 
participant will have 3 movement actions, and so on.
Actions in a Chase Round
On their turn in DEX order (highest to lowest) each 
character may use their turn to:
i Move forward in the chase (spending movement 
actions to do so).
i Initiate one attack* using the Fighting, Firearms, or 
Drive Auto skill.
i Cast a spell.
i Perform some other action requiring time and per -
haps a dice roll, such as picking a lock.
*Note that some monsters are capable of multiple attacks 
in one round; these all take place on the monster’s turn.
A character may elect to delay acting until another 
character has acted. If this leads to more than one character 
wishing to act simultaneously, the one with the highest DEX 
takes priority. If both insist on waiting for the other, the 
round may end with neither of them acting.
Pushing Rolls in a Chase
Pushed rolls are not used in a chase. As in combat, a 
character usually has the opportunity for another attempt 
on the following round.
Part 3: Movement
Moving From One Location to the Next
If an area is free of hazards, such as an empty corridor or 
stretch of clear straight road, the cost of moving from one 
location to the next is 1 movement action.
Hazards
A chase that takes place on even, clear ground will soon be 
resolved if the pursuer is faster than the character he or she 
is chasing; or, if both are of the same MOV speed, the chase 
might never end, with one character staying just out of range 
of the other. Either way, this leads to a bland chase scene 
based purely upon numbers. 
Back to Harvey’s attempt to escape from the angry 
farmer. Following speed rolls, Harvey’s MOV is now 
5; the farmer’s MOV is 6. Both get one movement 
action by default. The farmer gets a second move -
ment action because his speed is one more than that 
of the slowest character in the chase—Harvey.
Returning to Harvey being pursued down the track 
by the angry farmer. Following speed rolls, Harvey’s 
MOV is now 5; the farmer’s MOV is 6. Harvey’s DEX 
is 55. The farmer’s DEX is 50. 
Harvey’s turn:
Harvey has 1 movement action and moves 
forward 1 location. That is the end of Harvey’s turn. 
Farmer’s turn:
The farmer has 2 movement actions and advances 
2 locations. That is the end of the farmer’s turn.
 
At the end of round 1, the farmer has closed the 
gap from 2 locations to 1 location. Clearly if the chase 
continues in the same manner, the farmer will catch 
up with Harvey at the end of next round. If the farmer 
had the higher DEX, he would have moved first in 
round 1 and caught up with Harvey immediately.
After Harvey’s Move:
Farmer Harvey
End of Round One:
FarmerHarvey
Using  
Miniatures 
You may wish to use          
miniatures and model cars to 
track a chase. Just decide 
which miniature represents 
which character and then use 
markers or dots on a piece 
of paper to denote the range
 
increments.
===== PDF page index 146 (rulebook p.146) =====
135 
chapter 7: chases
Hazards add spice to a chase scene: hairpin bends, 
slippery steps, thorny bushes, thick mud, and so on. Hazards 
typically slow characters and vehicles down, and if badly 
handled, can also cause harm. 
The Keeper should present the hazard and allow each 
character to decide how they deal with it. Skill is always 
factor, and sometimes taking a cautious approach, slowing 
down in order to make a more considered attempt, can help. 
Other times, a reckless approach might be taken to use brute 
force and speed, such as when breaking down a locked door 
or taking corners at speed. 
If a character elects to take a cautious approach, 
movement actions may be spent to gain bonus dice on the 
skill roll to negotiate a hazard. 1 movement action buys 1 
bonus die, or 2 movement actions buys 2 bonus dice (2 bonus 
dice is the maximum that can be rolled). If the skill roll is 
successful the character or vehicle is not further delayed or 
damaged by the hazard and is free to move on.
If the skill roll to negotiate a hazard is failed, the Keeper 
should decide if damage is inflicted on the character or 
vehicle, and how much, using Table III: Other Forms of 
Damage (see page 124) as a guide for damage to characters, 
or Table VI: Vehicular Collisions (see page 147) for damage 
to vehicles. Failing to negotiate an obstacle or taking damage 
is also likely to slow the character or vehicle; roll 1D3 for 
number of lost movement actions. 
Notice how a hazard is written in the space between two 
dots. The dots represent the locations on either side of the 
hazard. Thus, in the example nearby, the area labeled “mud” 
is a hazard for those travelling from one location to the next. 
After negotiating a hazard a character should move onto the 
next location whether they pass or fail the skill roll.
Skills and Hazards
The Keeper will specify a skill or choice of skills that can 
be used to negotiate a hazard, along with a difficulty level. 
The Keeper should welcome suggestions from players for 
alternative ways in which their investigators might negotiate 
obstacles, and, as always, the Keeper is final arbiter of what 
skill is acceptable. Some examples of appropriate skills are:
G Climb skill to get over fences and walls, or to climb 
down from a high window.
G Swim skill to cross a river or lake.
G Dodge skill to weave through a crowd or avoid fall -
ing over trashcans in a narrow alley.
G STR to wade through thick mud.
G DEX to run along the top of a wall without falling 
off.
G Drive Auto is the appropriate skill in a car chase.
This list is not exhaustive; other skills may be used if 
judged appropriate.  
As Harvey flees the angry farmer, he sees that the 
section of track ahead is rough and muddy. 
Harvey’s turn:
Harvey charges towards the muddy patch, taking 
big strides; certainly a reckless action! The Keeper 
asks for a DEX roll, which Harvey makes. Harvey 
moves onto the next location, having used his one 
movement action for this round. 
Farmer’s turn:
The farmer has 2 movement actions and reaches 
the same rough muddy hazard. However, the farmer’s 
DEX roll is failed and he slips and falls. Referring to 
Table III: Other Forms of Damage , the Keeper 
chooses Moderate Injury, inflicting 2 (from a roll 
of 1D6) points of damage. In addition, the farmer 
must pay 1 (1D3) additional movement action. He 
has already used all of his movement actions for this 
round, so the delay will cost one of his two movement 
actions in the next round.
Hazards: mud
Start of 
Round:
End of 
Round: Harvey
FarmerHarvey
Farmer
Caught trying to flee out the window.

===== PDF page index 147 (rulebook p.147) =====
136 
Call of Cthulhu
Sample Hazards for Car Chases
G Traffic jam with room to weave between vehicles.
G Performing a U-turn or bootlegger reverse.
G Roadwork that causes an obstruction.
G Road traffic accident.
G Pedestrian crossing.
G Busy junction.
G Cyclists in the road.
G Sharp bends or pot holes.
G Animals (deer, goats, sheep) on the road.
G Other vehicles pulling out or stopping suddenly.
G Fallen rocks and debris on the road.
G Narrow road between a cliff and a drop.
G Slow-moving delivery vehicles and refuse collec-
tion trucks.
G Pedestrianized area.
G Two men carrying a large sheet of glass across the 
street.
G A marketplace or building site.
G A large stack of cardboard boxes.
G Overtaking a vehicle on a narrow road or in the face 
of oncoming traffic.
G Heading off-road or through a field.
G An oncoming vehicle (a hazard can move).
Sample Hazards for Foot Chases
G A low fence or wall.
G A latched window.
G A river, lake, or muddy swamp.
G A crowded street.
G A narrow alley.
G A rooftop.
G A hole in a wall.
G A crawlspace,  junk-filled attic, or cellar.
G A spiral staircase.
G Between the stacks of a library or museum.
Barriers
Barriers block progress until they have been successfully 
negotiated or removed. A barrier might be a locked door, a 
tall fence, an abyss, etc. The distinction between a hazard and 
a barrier may sometimes be unclear. Climbing over a 4-foot 
fence may be hazardous, but would not stop a determined 
person, whereas climbing over a 7-foot wall may well present a 
barrier. Climbing up to a second-floor window would present 
a barrier (if one fails to climb, the window is out of reach), 
whereas climbing down is a hazard (one can always simply 
fall). The Keeper must decide when a hazard constitutes a 
barrier; if it is a barrier it prevents further movement until 
the skill roll is passed or the barrier is broken through. Failing 
a skill roll to pass a barrier may cause damage and delay as a 
hazard does, but the usual consequence is simply the delay 
and inconvenience of not moving to the next location.
Skills and Barriers
G Jump skill to leap across a chasm or jump from one 
roof to another.
G STR to force open a door.
G Locksmith skill to open a locked door or window.
There can be more than one way to get past some barriers. 
A locked door might be picked (using Locksmith skill) or 
smashed open (see Breaking down Barriers below). Equally, 
some characters might seek to climb over a fence (Climb skill) 
while others might simply smash their way through.
Summary: Five Steps to 
Setting Up a Chase
To sum up, there are five steps for the Keeper to 
perform when setting up a chase:
G Place the pursuer.
G Place the fleeing character.
G Position hazards and barriers.
G Allocate each participant a number of move -
ment actions.
G Determine DEX order.

===== PDF page index 148 (rulebook p.148) =====
137 
chapter 7: chases
Sample Barriers for Car Chases
G Traffic jam with no room to weave between vehicles.
G Police roadblock.
G A fallen tree.
G A rockslide.
Sample Barriers for Foot Chases
G A high fence or wall.
G A chasm.
G A locked door.
Breaking Down Barriers
Whether it be kicking down a locked door or ramming 
through a police roadblock, sometimes brute force is the 
best solution. No attack roll is required. For each point of 
their build, vehicles inflict 1D10 damage to a barrier.
Vehicles are assumed to be travelling at high speed when 
attempting to break through a barrier; therefore, if a vehicle 
attacks a barrier and fails to destroy it, the vehicle is wrecked. 
The angry farmer is still pursuing Harvey. A post-
and-rail fence blocks his path.
Harvey’s turn:
The fence looks old; Harvey charges forward, 
aiming to burst through it. Harvey inflicts 3 (1D3) 
hit points of damage on the fence. The Keeper 
decides the fence is weak and only had 5 hit points, 
and so is now down to 2. The rails crack but don’t 
break. Harvey remains on the location on which he 
began the round.
Farmer’s turn:
The farmer has a debt of 1 movement action 
due to slipping over in the mud last round, so has 
one movement action and is on the same location 
as Harvey. He spends his movement action to attack 
Harvey, but is unsuccessful.
Hazards:
Farmer
mud
End of 
the Round:
fence
Harvey
"What are you doing?! Get out of the street!"
===== PDF page index 149 (rulebook p.149) =====
138 
Call of Cthulhu
If the barrier is destroyed, the vehicle suffers an amount of 
damage equal to half the barrier’s hit points prior to impact.
When a barrier is reduced to 0 hit points it is no longer a 
barrier. The debris that results from smashing a barrier may 
present a hazard to those that follow afterwards.
Sample Barriers and Hit Points:
G Internal door or thin wooden fence: 5 hit points.
G Standard back door: 10 hit points.
G Strong domestic external door: 15 hit points.
G 9” brick wall: 25 hit points.
G Mature tree: 50 hit points.
G Concrete bridge support: 100 hit points.
Part 4: Conflict
The characters or vehicles must be on the same location to 
attack one another, unless firearms are involved. Initiating 
an attack costs 1 movement action. Characters are limited to 
their usual number of attacks per round. Attacks are resolved 
as they are in regular combat.
A character should always be given the opportunity 
to respond when challenged (fighting back or dodging) 
regardless of whether they have any movement actions 
remaining. 
Large monsters or creatures might attack a vehicle aiming 
to inflict damage or to use a fighting maneuver to push, tip 
or even pick up and throw a vehicle (see Damage Bonus and 
Builds, page 279).
Vehicles may engage in combat using the regular combat 
rules, substituting Drive Auto skill for both Fighting and 
Dodge skills. Treat the vehicle as a weapon that inflicts 1D10 
damage per point of build. Each full 10 hit points of damage 
decreases a vehicle’s build by one point (round down); any 
remaining damage below 10 points is ignored. Whenever a 
vehicle is used to inflict damage, it also suffers an amount of 
damage equal to half (round down) of that which it delivers, 
but never enough to cause it to lose a greater amount of build 
points than the target which it hit originally possessed. 
If a character is attacked with a vehicle, that character may 
fight back or dodge. Successfully fighting back allows the target 
character to avoid an attack and simultaneously land one of 
their own. An investigator’s attack on a vehicle is likely to be 
relatively ineffective; on the other hand, if it is dark young that 
is fighting back against a vehicle, it may be a different story.
Using Fighting Maneuvers in a Chase
If a character or vehicle seeks to trip, push, or otherwise cause 
their opponent to lose control, this can be achieved with a 
fighting maneuver. A successful fighting maneuver causes 
the same outcome as failing a skill roll for a hazard: 1D3 
movement actions are lost and, if appropriate to the situation, 
an amount of damage is selected from Table III: Other 
Forms of Damage  (page 124) for characters, or Table VI: 
Vehicular Collisions (page 147) for vehicles. Alternatively, if 
a character has a specific goal he or she wishes to set for a 
fighting maneuver, this can be done in the way it would in 
regular combat (see Fighting Maneuvers, page 105).
A fighting maneuver can be made against a vehicle to 
push it off the road or cause a loss of control. The same 
limitations regarding build apply: if a vehicle challenges 
another vehicle that is 1 build larger than itself, 1 penalty 
die is applied to the attack roll. If the target vehicle is 2 build 
points larger, 2 penalty dice are applied. If the target vehicle 
is 3 build points larger, the maneuver is impossible, as the 
size difference is too great.
A car might do 50 (5D10) points of damage to a light 
motorcycle, and therefore the car would suffer 25 
points of damage itself (enough to cause a damage of 
2 Build points), but a light motorcycle only has Build 
1, so the damage to the car is limited to 1 build point.
At the start of the round, Harvey is in the same location as 
the angry farmer and is trying to climb a fence to escape. 
Harvey’s turn:
Harvey fails his Climb roll. The Keeper does not 
inflict any negative outcome; instead he decides that 
the farmer’s attack will suffice. 
Farmer’s turn:
The farmer lunges at Harvey. In response, Harvey 
attempts a fighting maneuver to throw the farmer over 
the fence, planning to run the other way afterwards. 
Both have Build 0 and so Harvey does not take any 
additional penalty dice. The farmer rolls a Failure, but 
Harvey rolls a Regular success and hurls the farmer 
clean over the fence! As a result of the successful 
fighting maneuver against him, a skill roll must then 
be made for the farmer as if encountering a hazard. 
The Keeper chooses DEX as the most appropriate 
attribute to test whether the farmer lands on his feet 
or his back. The DEX roll is failed; the farmer suffers 
a “minor injury” for 3 (1D3) points of damage, and 
1 (1D3) from his movement action. The farmer has 
landed on his back and takes a few moments to get 
up. This is the end of the farmer’s turn; he has used his 
2 movement actions for the round (1 to initiate the 
attack, 1 as part of the cost of the fighting maneuver 
used on him). 
The Keeper’s map of the chase:
Hazards:
Farmer
Start of 
the Round:
fence
End of 
the Round:
FarmerHarvey
Harvey
===== PDF page index 150 (rulebook p.150) =====
139 
chapter 7: chases
Part 5: Optional Rules
“They’re coming to get you, Barbra. ”
—George A. Romero, Night of the Living Dead
Parts 1 to 4 have covered all of the essential chase rules. 
This final part includes optional rules that can be used to 
embellish and further develop chases. 
Choosing a Route
It is the nature of a chase that the character being chased (the 
quarry) wants nothing other than to escape and must make 
split-second decisions whether to turn left or right. If there 
is a choice of routes available, the lead character is free to 
choose and may seek a more difficult path or an easier one, 
especially if he or she feels it would be to their advantage to 
do so. For example, a strong swimmer might opt to leap into 
the river to lose their pursuer. If the investigator is the one 
being pursued then the Keeper should regularly present a 
choice of routes.
Random Hazards and Barriers
It would be very easy for the Keeper to stack the odds against 
the players by describing new terrain that constantly works 
against the investigators. Y ou may find it more fun all round 
to create hazards and barriers randomly.
Roll 1D100:
01-59 = Clear
60+ = 1 Regular hazard/barrier
85+ = 1 Hard hazard/barrier
96+ = 1 Extreme hazard /barrier
If the environment is especially hazardous, such as 
driving through rush hour traffic in a bustling city or along 
country lanes at midnight, add a penalty die to the roll for 
random hazards and barriers.
If the environment is unlikely to have any dangers or 
delays, such as driving down a quiet freeway, add a bonus 
die to the roll for random hazards and barriers.
Sudden Hazards
Just because an area is free of hazards one moment does not 
mean that it will remain that way. A car may suddenly pull 
out, a pedestrian might run into the road without looking, 
someone might come running around the corner from 
the opposite direction, a loose dog might assault a fleeing 
investigator, and so on. 
At any point in the chase round, either the Keeper or a 
player may call for a group Luck roll. If the Luck roll is passed, 
events unfold in the player’s favor; the players may dictate 
where and when a sudden hazard occurs. If the Luck roll is 
failed, this indicates a sudden hazard for the investigators, 
presented by the Keeper.
Sudden hazards should be of Regular difficulty. Players 
and Keeper should alternate in calling for Luck rolls for 
sudden hazards. If the players call for a Luck roll for a sudden 
hazard, they may not call for one again until after the Keeper 
has called for one and vice versa. Either side may call for the 
first sudden hazard in a chase.
If a chase is becoming a long drawn out affair, the Keeper 
may decide to raise the level of difficulty of sudden hazards.
Pedal to the Metal
When spending a movement action to move a vehicle 
forward, instead of moving just 1 location, the vehicle can 
accelerate and move between 2 and 5 locations for the same 
cost of 1 movement action.
A cultist truck driver is using his Drive Auto skill to 
perform a fighting maneuver, aiming to push Harvey’s 
car off the road. Harvey is trying to avoid the truck, 
using his Drive Auto skill in place of Dodge. The truck 
is bigger than Harvey’s car, so the cultist takes no 
penalty dice on the maneuver. Drive Auto rolls are 
made for Harvey and for the cultist. The cultist rolls 
a Hard success, Harvey rolls a Regular success; the 
cultist wins. 
Harvey’s car is pushed off the road and the Keeper 
inflicts an automatic “minor incident” result (see 
Table VI: Vehicular Collisions, page 147), causing 
the loss of another point of build as the car rides over 
the verge and into the ditch. This also costs Harvey 2 
(1D3) movement actions and 2 (1D3) hit points.
Conflict often arises in the middle of a chase.
===== PDF page index 151 (rulebook p.151) =====
140 
Call of Cthulhu
The listed MOV speeds for vehicles are relatively low, 
only a few points above those of a pedestrian. Of course, 
vehicles can travel much faster than pedestrians. A vehicle 
has the option of accelerating; any one of its movement 
actions can be spent to travel multiple locations. Travelling 
at higher speeds has its downside of course, making hazards 
more difficult to negotiate.
G As normal, a driver can use 1 movement action to 
move 1 location. 
G A driver can elect to move 2 or 3 locations with one 
movement action. Any hazards encountered have 
one penalty die applied to the skill rolls.
G A driver can elect to move 4 or 5 locations with one 
movement action. Any hazards encountered have 
two penalty dice applied to the skill rolls.
The increase in speed must be announced prior to 
moving. Just as in real life, driving at speed is less risky if 
one has a good view of what lies on the road ahead. How 
far a driver can see at any time is wholly dependent on the 
situation and environment in which the chase is taking place. 
In a crowded city, one might only be able to see a couple of 
locations ahead (1D3 if you wish to determine it randomly); 
in the suburbs one can see several locations ahead (1D6 if 
you wish to determine it randomly), and in the country, on 
Harvey is being chased through Arkham by two police patrol cars. Harvey has 1 movement action, the police have 2. 
Harvey has the higher DEX and moves first in the round.
Harvey’s turn:
His player wants to accelerate and asks how far Harvey can see. The Keeper decides that Harvey can see the next three 
locations, then rolls randomly to determine what they are. The Keeper rolls 29 and 02—2 consecutive clear locations. The 
Keeper then rolls 87 for the third location—a hazard of Hard difficulty level. The Keeper tells the player that Harvey has 
a quiet road in front of him, but up ahead he can see a traffic jam. 
Harvey puts his foot down, choosing to move 2 locations with his 1 movement action (using the Pedal to the Metal option 
—see below). No one has called for a sudden hazard yet this round, and the Keeper does so now before Harvey actually 
moves, hoping to throw something in Harvey’s way as he accelerates down the open road. Harvey’s player wins the Luck 
roll and she puts the hazard into play right in front of the police car, telling how a delivery truck pulls out in front of the 
police car without looking. In the meantime, Harvey moves on 2 locations.
Police cars’ turn:
P2, the lead police car, spends a movement action to advance 1 location. The Keeper must make a Drive Auto roll for 
the police car (P2) at Regular difficulty level, but fails. The cop car clips the delivery truck. The Keeper chooses a “minor 
incident”. The police car loses 1 (1D3) build point and 2 (1D3) movement actions, sending it spinning into the curb. At 
the end of its turn, the police car (P2) owes 1 movement action, which will reduce its number of actions next round to 1. 
As a reminder, a note is made to the car’s marker on the Keeper’s track:
P1, the other police car, can see Harvey getting away and accelerates, choosing to move 3 locations with its first movement 
action. The other police car (P2) and truck still present a hazard, especially as some other vehicles have stopped around 
them. Furthermore, because it is accelerating, the police car must take a penalty die when rolling to negotiate the hazard. 
Police car P1 sounds its siren and, with a successful Drive Auto roll, it speeds through. Harvey is now only 2 locations 
ahead, so with its second movement action the police car moves on 2 locations to draw level with Harvey.
The Keeper called for the sudden hazard during that round. On the following round a player may choose to do so. The 
Keeper is unable to call for another sudden hazard until after the players do so.
Hazards:
Start of the Round:
jam
Police 1Police 2 Harvey
Hazards:
Start of the Round:
jam
Police 1Police 2 Harvey
truck
Hazards:
Start of the Round:
jam
Police 1
Police 2 (-1) Harvey
truck
Hazards:
Start of the Round:
jam
Police 1
Police 2 (-1) Harvey
truck
===== PDF page index 152 (rulebook p.152) =====
141 
chapter 7: chases
a straight road, one might see a considerable distance (1D10 
locations if you wish to determine it randomly). The Keeper 
may not have determined what these upcoming locations 
are, and should do so as required.
Once a decision has been made to accelerate and travel 
a number of locations on one movement action, it cannot 
be retracted; the vehicle will travel the full distance (2, 3, 4 
or 5 locations) or until it fails a hazard roll. If a hazard roll 
is failed, the outcome is resolved, after which any further 
movement must be paid for and started afresh.
Any penalty dice for acceleration should be applied to 
hazards, but usually not when breaking through barriers, for 
which increased speed can be beneficial.
This increased speed can be used multiple times in one 
chase round. By putting the pedal to the metal, a car with 
4 movement actions could potentially move 20 locations in 
one chase round.
Escaping the Pursuer
The pursuer can continue chasing the fleeing character so 
long as their location or direction of travel can be identified. 
Each chase is unique, with its own string of locations, so 
Keeper judgments must be made about points where the 
pursuer might lose the quarry. 
Hiding
A Fleeing character can attempt to hide from the pursuer 
at any point in the chase. Clearly, having a longer lead will 
provide more time in which to hide. The Keeper should weigh  
the situation as with any skill roll before setting a difficulty 
level. If the pursuer fails to find the hidden investigator with 
a Spot Hidden roll, the quarry has evaded capture.
Hiding a vehicle is not easy, but if there are hiding places 
and if the vehicle has sufficient lead, it may be attempted. A 
combined Stealth and Drive Auto skill roll (Combined Skill 
Rolls, page 92) is used to hide a vehicle, with the roll needing 
to succeed against both skills.
A deep one is chasing Harvey through an abandoned 
theater. At the start of a round the deep one is still 
in the theater, while Harvey has exited and is now 3 
chase locations ahead. As the deep one exits the the -
ater, the Keeper makes a Tracking roll; can the deep 
one pick up Harvey’s trail? If not, the chase is over.
Harvey is being chased by the police.
===== PDF page index 153 (rulebook p.153) =====
142 
Call of Cthulhu
Passengers
Passengers do not make a speed roll and do not have 
movement actions. They may act once on their turn in the 
DEX order. Typically, vehicle passengers might use firearms 
or throw things out of the car to obstruct those following. 
One passenger can assist the driver with navigation, 
reading maps, and offering advice on how to negotiate 
hazards. If a passenger uses their action to assist the driver 
in this way they may make one Spot Hidden or Navigate skill 
roll. If successful, on the vehicle’s next move, the vehicle can 
accelerate once with 1 fewer penalty die (see Pedal to the 
Metal, page 139). Thus, the vehicle might advance up to 3 
locations with no penalty die, or up to 5 with 1 penalty die.
Ranged Attacks During a Chase
Firearms can be used during a chase: If a character on foot 
stops for a moment, he or she may use a firearm as normal. 
The options are as for one combat round of gunfire (i.e. one 
shot with a rifle, up to three shots with a handgun, etc.) This 
option costs 1 movement action, but no movement is made.
If a character is continuing to race (on foot or in a 
vehicle), any firearms attack rolls are made with one 
additional penalty die. Taking shots in this manner does not 
affect a character’s performance in the chase. The options for 
firing are otherwise the same as for one combat round. This 
option does not cost any additional movement actions.
Vehicle tires may be targeted with gunfire: apply an 
additional penalty die to target tires due to their small 
size. Tires have an armor value of 3 and are only damaged 
by impaling weapons. If a tire takes 2 points of damage, it 
bursts. A burst tire reduces a vehicle’s build by 1 point.
The Keeper should judge the ranges for firearms. Both 
driver and passengers gain protection from a vehicle’s armor 
(see Table V: Vehicle Reference Charts, page 145).
Driver Damage
If the driver of a moving vehicle suffers a major wound and 
remains conscious, he or she may still lose control of their 
vehicle and must roll immediately as for a Hazard at Hard 
difficulty level. A driver who falls unconscious due to a 
major wound automatically loses control of the vehicle.
Dealing with a Location  
in an Alternative Way
A character may choose to interact with a location in an 
alternative or unexpected way. For example, if a location is 
described as “an empty residential street, ” the assumption 
may be that the quarry will run down it. Instead of this, they 
might decide to run to the nearest door and attempt to open 
it (by force if need be). If it fits the story then go with it. 
Characters Joining a Chase in Progress
Any characters who join an ongoing chase should make a 
speed roll to determine their MOV rate. The Keeper should 
then position them on an appropriate location. 
A character who joins a chase as a pursuer needs a MOV 
rate that is at least equal to the slowest fleeing character. If 
they fail to achieve this, they can be ignored.
If a character joining a chase as a fleeing character has a 
MOV rate that is slower than the previously slowest member 
of the chase, some adjustment is required: the number of 
movement actions that everyone in the chase has should be 
recalculated. Every character gets one movement action by 
default, plus one movement action for each point by which 
their MOV rate exceeds that of the new slowest participant in 
the chase. 
There is no need to recalculate speeds or movement 
actions when a character leaves a chase. 
Harvey is fleeing from a deep one. The deep one follows 
Harvey, who decides to hide in an abandoned build-
ing. Deep ones don’t have a Spot Hidden skill listed; 
the Keeper decides that the creature’s skill would be 
below 50%, and so Harvey must make a Stealth roll 
at Regular difficulty level. The Keeper awards Harvey 
two bonus dice since he had a good lead and there 
are plenty of hiding places. Harvey’s player rolls 45, 
65, and 75—all failures. Harvey hears the deep one 
entering the building and bursts out of his cover, only 
to find himself trapped, about to be attacked by the 
deep one!
Another Example: Amy has a good lead on her 
pursuers and seeks to hide her car by driving into an 
underground parking garage. Amy has 60% Drive Auto 
and 40% Stealth. Her pursuer is only just out of sight 
and might catch a glimpse of Amy’s car entering the 
garage, so the Keeper sets the difficulty level to Regular. 
Amy rolls 47, a Regular success for Drive Auto but not 
for Stealth; her pursuers spot her entering the garage!
A passenger in another vehicle fires a handgun at 
Harvey. A Regular success is rolled for the firearms at-
tack. 1D10 damage is rolled, resulting in 10 damage. 
Harvey’s vehicle armor reduces this by 2, so Harvey 
takes 8 hit points damage. This is a major wound for 
Harvey, who wins a CON roll to remain conscious. He 
must now make a Drive Auto roll to keep control of 
his vehicle. He fails the roll. The Keeper refers to Table 
VI: Vehicular Collisions  (page 147) and chooses 
“moderate incident” (it being a Hard difficulty level 
hazard), rolling 1 (1D6) point of build damage and 
a loss of 3 (1D3) movement actions. This also results 
in 2 (1D6) hit points damage for Harvey. The Keeper 
describes the outcome; Harvey loses control of his car, 
which glances off the side of an oncoming car, send -
ing Harvey’s car spinning out of control. It takes him 
a while to recover control and rejoin the chase. His 
location remains unaltered.
===== PDF page index 154 (rulebook p.154) =====
143 
chapter 7: chases
Switching Between Modes of Movement 
There are a variety of modes of movement in the game. 
Some creatures have alternate speeds listed for flying or 
swimming. If no alternate MOV rating is listed, the Keeper 
may allow the character to use half of their standard MOV , 
providing the mode of movement is one that the character 
can perform. Thus a human with MOV 8 would have MOV 
4 when swimming, but would not have a MOV rating for 
flying. 
When characters change between modes of movement 
that continue to use their own physical body for propulsion, 
a fresh speed roll is not required. Simply adjust their MOV 
accordingly, remembering that they may be at either +1 or 
-1, depending on whether they achieved an Extreme success 
on or failed their speed roll (CON) at the start of the chase 
(see Establishing the Chase, page 132).
Characters that switch from being on foot (or other self-
propelled mode) to driving a car should make a fresh speed roll 
using Drive Auto skill. When a character becomes a pedestrian, 
he or she should make a fresh speed roll using CON. 
If the character’s speed (MOV) is changed, their number 
of movement actions should be altered. Refer to Characters 
Joining a Chase in Progress (see page 142).
Characters Creating Hazards
Investigators, monsters and non-player characters may 
create hazards or barriers through their actions during play. 
Doing so will usually require the expenditure of a movement 
action (for the time required), a skill roll (to achieve it) or 
both. The following ideas are examples of what might be 
attempted, and the Keeper should judge each situation on 
its own merits.
G Pausing to secure a door with a bolt or key would 
cost 1 movement action but no skill roll.
G Pausing to secure a door using Locksmith skill 
would require a whole chase round and a successful 
skill roll.
G Moving a heavy wardrobe against a door would 
require a STR roll and a movement action.
G Upending a fruit stall to cause a delay might only 
cost 1 movement action.
G Firing a gun to cause a crowd to panic would require 
a Luck roll. If failed, the action causes more trouble 
than it is worth. If successful, the crowd presents a 
hazard for those following.
A Hunting Horror chases two cars on a mountain road.
===== PDF page index 155 (rulebook p.155) =====
144 
Call of Cthulhu
G Y elling, “Stop that man, he’s a thief, ” at bystanders, 
hoping they might assist, would call for a Fast Talk 
or Intimidate skill roll.
Players may also take equally creative approaches to 
negotiating hazards. 
Splitting Up
Characters in a chase may choose to take different routes. If 
so, you now have an additional chase to track. 
Monsters in a Chase
The majority of monsters and animals act the same way as 
people in a chase. Some have abilities that may exempt them 
from certain skill rolls; for example, those that fly would not 
need to make Jump or Climb rolls. 
Many monsters, animals, and non-player characters will 
lack listed values for the various skills that might be called 
upon in a chase (Jump, Swim, Drive Auto, etc.) In such cases 
the Keeper should use the following as a guide:
G Where the monster or non-player character has an 
implied aptitude, use their DEX in place of the skill.
G Where the monster or non-player character has an 
implied ineptitude, use one-fifth of their DEX in 
place of the skill (or simply rule the attempt to be an 
automatic failure).
G Where the monster or non-player character has 
neither implied aptitude nor ineptitude, use half of 
their DEX in place of the skill.
If other skills are required, the Keeper might use a 
similar approach, using what he or she feels to be the most 
appropriate characteristic. For example, should you wish to 
determine the Spot Hidden skill of a particular monster (for 
whom there is no listed Spot Hidden skill), INT might be 
judged most appropriate; use either its full INT, half of its 
INT or one-fifth of its INT depending on how perceptive 
you feel the monster to be.
Fleeing the Scene
Y ou may have a scene in which you wish to gauge how far 
the investigators manage to flee in a limited time. The chase 
rules can be used for this, counting the number of locations 
moved within a specified number of rounds. 
Vehicular Collisions
When a skill roll to negotiate a hazard is failed, the Keeper 
must consider the cause and the likely damage, and rate 
it against the left-hand column on Table VI: Vehicular 
Collisions (page 147). If unsure, simply use the defaults 
of “minor incident” for a Regular difficulty level hazard, 
“moderate incident” for a Hard difficulty level hazard, or 
“severe incident” for Extreme difficulty level hazards. 
The damage should also be rolled for each occupant of 
a vehicle involved in a collision, substituting “hit points” in 
place of “build” . Thus, a car that is in a moderate incident 
suffers 1D6 build damage and each occupant of the car 
suffers 1D6 hit points of damage.
Most collisions should also result in a delay as the vehicle 
skids or loses speed (costing 1D3 movement actions).
Harvey is on the run in the streets of New York. To 
reach the next location he must push through a crowd, 
which presents a hazard. If he fails his DEX roll to weave 
through the crowd, the Keeper rules that Harvey will be 
slowed for 1D3 movement actions. Harvey would only 
take damage if he fumbled the roll; perhaps his desperate 
pushing would annoy someone so much they punch 
him. However, thinking fast, Harvey pulls his pistol and 
fires into the air. The Keeper asks for a Luck roll, which 
Harvey fails. The Keeper decides that the crowd scatters 
and there is no longer a hazard. However a nearby 
police officer is now after Harvey too!
Gnoph-keh are somewhat like giant polar bears and 
so would probably be great swimmers—allow them 
a Swim skill equal to their DEX. You may feel that 
ghouls would make poor swimmers, in which case you 
might allow them a Swim skill equal to one-fifth of 
their DEX.
"Somebody! Help me!"
===== PDF page index 156 (rulebook p.156) =====
145 
chapter 7: chases
Table V: Vehicle Reference Charts
The following vehicles use the Drive Auto skill.
Vehicles on the following chart require specialist training to 
operate; the skill Operate Heavy Machinery might be substituted. 
Vehicles on the following chart use the Pilot skill. Many require a 
substantial crew. The armor value is for those on deck.
Vehicles on the following chart use the Pilot skill. Many require 
a substantial crew.
Vehicles on the following chart use the Ride skill. 
Key
MOV: A rating of the vehicle’s speed and maneuverability 
in chases. These ratings are for modern vehicles and may be 
reduced by around 20% for 1920s vehicles (though there were 
cars in the 1920s that could exceed 100 MPH). 
Build: A rating of the strength and size of the vehicle. When 
reduced to zero, the vehicle is out of action. Each full 10 hit 
points of damage decreases a vehicle’s build by 1 point (round 
down); damage below 10 hit points is ignored.
If a vehicle’s build is reduced to half (round down) of its 
starting value or lower, it is impaired; one penalty die is applied 
to all Drive Auto (or appropriate skill) rolls.
If a vehicle takes damage equal to its full build value in one 
incident, the vehicle is completely wrecked in an impressive 
manner. It may explode, burn, roll or suffer some combination 
thereof. All occupants of the vehicle are likely to die. Whether or 
not investigators have a chance of survival is up to the Keeper: 
Luck rolls may be allowed. Those who are fortunate get thrown 
free, though it is recommended they take at least 2D10 damage. 
If a vehicle’s build is otherwise reduced to zero by 
cumulative damage (i.e. in increments of less than the vehicle’s 
starting build value), it becomes undriveable, grinding to a halt. 
Depending on the situation (and perhaps a Luck roll) this may 
lead to an accident resulting in 1D10 damage for the driver and 
each passenger. 
Armor for people: The armor rating is for the passengers and 
driver, reflecting the number of points of armor the vehicle 
provides against external attacks.
Passengers and crew: The number of people that can be 
accommodated.
Vehicle MOV Build Armor 
for people
Passengers
Car, economy 13 4 1 3 or 4
Car, standard 14 5 2 4
Car, deluxe 15 6 2 4
Sports car 16 5 2 1
Pickup truck 14 6 2 2+
6-ton truck 13 7 2 2+
18-wheeler 13 9 2 3+
Motorcycle, light 13 1 0 1
Motorcycle, 
heavy
16 3 0 1
Air Vehicles MOV Build Armor for 
people
Passengers
Dirigible 12 10 2 112+
Propeller plane 15 5 1 4+
Bomber plane 17 11 2 10+
Jet plane 18 11 3 50+
Helicopter 15 5 2 15+
Other forms of 
transport
MOV Build Armor for 
people
Passengers
Horse (with 
rider)
11 4 0 1
4-horse carriage 10 3 0 6+
Bicycle 10 0.5 0 1
Heavy 
Vehicles
MOV Build Armor for 
people
Passengers
Tank 11 20 24 4
Steam train 12 12 1 400+
Modern train 15 14 2 400+
Water Vehicles MOV Build Armor for 
people
Passengers
Row boat 4 2 0 3
Hovercraft 12 4 0 22
Motorboat 14 3 0 6
Cruise ship 11 32 0 2200+
Battleship 11 65 0 1800+
Aircraft carrier 11 75 0 3200+
Submarine 12 24 0 120+
===== PDF page index 157 (rulebook p.157) =====
146 
Call of Cthulhu
Chases in the Air and Sea
Chases can take place in any environment, and the Keeper 
should create new hazards and barriers appropriately. For 
example, at sea: rocks, shallows, buoys, waves, strong winds, 
etc. Or, for example, in the air: clouds, tall buildings, birds, 
cables, anti-aircraft fire, etc.
MOV Rates
The MOV rate is used as a measure of relative speeds. One 
point of MOV is significant in a chase; it allows for one 
additional movement action, and for this reason, the scale of 
MOV rating to speed is not linear. Each point of MOV equates 
with an approximate increase in speed of around 50%. 
The MOV rating of a creature is not necessarily their 
maximum speed over a short distance, but is intended 
to represent their overall speed in a chase. For example, a 
world class sprinter can achieve MOV 11 over 100 meters, 
but 12 MPH (MOV 9) would be a more realistic speed for a 
fit human over distance, equating to a 5-minute mile.
Chases with Multiple Characters
When running a chase with multiple characters, the only 
significant difference lies in the initial phase; see Establishing 
the Chase (page 132).
First, decide who is chasing whom and whether the 
fleeing characters are staying together or splitting up. If they 
split up there will be multiple chases and each chase should 
be tracked and resolved separately.
Each character involved in a chase makes a speed roll 
(using either Drive Auto or CON) to establish their MOV 
rate for the chase (see Speed roll , page 132). Once this is 
done, list the participants of the chase in speed order in their 
two groups: pursuers and fleeing characters.
Next, eliminate those not in the chase:
Any fleeing characters who are faster than their fastest 
pursuer may escape the chase entirely if they wish to.
Any pursuers who are slower than the slowest fleeing 
character are left behind, and do not participate in the chase.
Harvey lights the fuse on a stick of dynamite then 
flees from the cave before it explodes. The fuse is long 
enough for a minimum of 7 rounds of movement. At 
the end of the seventh chase round, and each round 
thereafter, a Luck roll is called for—if it is failed, the 
dynamite explodes. The Keeper gives Harvey 1 move-
ment action per round. During each chase round, the 
player may make a skill roll to negotiate a hazard 
(scramble over wet rocks in an underground stream, 
climb a rope, and squeeze through the exit hole). 
When the dynamite explodes, the Keeper uses 
the range to attribute damage. The base range of 
dynamite is 3 yards; however, the Keeper decides 
that this should be doubled because of the enclosed 
environment. The Keeper places a location every 
6 yards, noting 1, 2, and 3 on the map to mark the 
three range increments; at range 1 the damage will 
be 4D10, at range 2 it will be 2D10 and at range 3 it 
will be 1D10. Once out of the exit Harvey will be safe. 
So long as Harvey does not fail his skill rolls when 
negotiating the hazards, he should be able to make 
it out safely.
On the first round Harvey fails his DEX roll and 
slips in the stream, taking 2 (1D3) points of damage 
and losing 3 (1D3) movement actions as he fumbles 
to regain his footing. He has 3 movement actions 
left before the Keeper starts asking for Luck rolls to 
determine if the dynamite explodes. Things are not 
looking so good for him now…
dynamite steamHazards:
3Harvey 2
rope exit
1
dynamite steamHazards:
32
rope exit
Harvey
1
Stealing a car might attract unwanted attention.
MOV 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
MPH 3 4 6 8 12 18 27 40
MOV 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
MPH 60 90 135 200 300 450 675 1000
===== PDF page index 158 (rulebook p.158) =====
147 
chapter 7: chases
The two groups are now positioned in 
order of their MOV ratings.
1. Place the pursuers: Start with the slowest 
pursuer, right at the back of the chase. Then 
place each of the other pursuers a number of 
locations ahead of him or her, equal to their 
difference in MOV speeds. Once all of the 
pursuers are placed, move onto the fleeing 
characters.
2. Place the fleeing characters:  As with a 
one-on-one chase, position a fleeing char -
acter (the slowest one) 2 locations ahead 
of the foremost pursuer. Then place each 
of the other fleeing characters a number of 
locations ahead of slowest fleeing character, 
equal to their difference in MOV speeds.
3. Position hazards: Note down any haz -
ards, barriers, or other landmarks.
4. Movement actions:  Determine how 
many movement actions each character has.
5. Determine DEX order: List participants 
in DEX order, fastest to slowest.
Table VI: Vehicular Collisions
Incident Damage Examples
Minor incident: 
Most Regular 
Hazards. May be 
cosmetic damage 
only, possibly 
something serious.
1D3-1 
Build
Glancing blow from another 
vehicle, grazing a lamp post, 
hitting a post, colliding with 
person or similar-sized creature.
Moderate incident: 
Most Hard Hazards. 
Might cause major 
damage. Might 
wreck a car. .
1D6 
Build 
Hitting a cow or large deer, 
collision with a heavy motorbike 
or economy car.
Severe incident: 
Most Extreme 
Hazards. Likely 
to wreck a car 
outright.
1D10 
Build
Collision with a standard car, 
lamp post or tree.
Mayhem: Likely 
to wreck a truck 
outright. Almost 
certain to wreck a 
car.
2D10 
Build
Collision with a truck or coach 
or a mature tree.
Road kill: Most 
vehicles will be little 
more than scattered 
debris.
5D10 
Build
Collision with a juggernaut or a 
train, hit by a meteor.
Gap of 2 
Locations
Fastest 
Pursuer
Slowest
Fleeing 
Character
Other
Fleeing
Characters
according
to their
MOV
Fastest
Fleeing
Character
Other
pursuers
relative
to their
MOV
Slowest
Pursuer
Chases for Multiple Characters

===== PDF page index 159 (rulebook p.159) =====
148 
Call of Cthulhu
Brian, Scott and Harvey are sitting drinking in their apartment one evening, when three cultists turn up at their door. 
The three investigators decide to flee via the window, knowing the door will not hold the cultists back for long. The Keeper 
establishes whether the investigators are all traveling in the same direction or splitting up; the players decide to head in the 
same direction. There will only be one chase.
The Keeper asks for a speed roll (CON) roll for each character. The investigators have to climb out of the window, while 
the cultists are delayed with breaking the door down. Both sides have an impediment, so neither side is given a bonus or 
penalty die for the speed roll.
Harvey (MOV 6): fails the CON roll: MOV 5 (6-1).
Brian (MOV 8): passes the CON roll: MOV 8.
Scott (MOV 9): passes the CON roll with an Extreme success: MOV 10 (9+1).
Cultist A (MOV 8): fails the CON roll: MOV 7 (8-1).
Cultist B (MOV 8): fails the CON roll: MOV 7 (8-1).
Cultist C (MOV 8): passes the CON roll with an Extreme success: MOV 9 (8+1).
Scott has a higher speed than any of his pursuers and escapes (unless he decides to hang around to help his buddies).
Brian and Harvey are heading in the same direction as Scott, but as their speed does not exceed that of the cultists, 
they may be caught. Thus, the chase is on!
Pursuing cultists in speed order:
Cultist A (7), Cultist B (7), Cultist C (9)
Fleeing investigators in speed order:
Harvey (5), Brian (8), Scott (10).
1. Place the pursuers: The Keeper begins by noting the slowest pursuers (Cultists A and B), are at the back of the chase, 
while 2 locations in front of them is Cultist C (speed 9 – speed 7 = a gap of 2 locations).
2. Place the fleeing characters: The gap between the fastest pursuer (Cultist C) and the slowest quarry (Harvey) is set to 
the default of 2 locations. Brian’s speed is 3 more than Harvey’s, so he begins 3 locations ahead of Harvey (unless Brian 
chooses to hang back to help his friend).
3. Position hazards: The Keeper sets up the chase with the investigators having fled their apartment though the window, 
now being pursued down an alleyway.
The illustration shows the Keeper’s record of the chase. The Keeper notes only the characters, hazards and barriers.
Cultist A and B stand at the window, about to climb out.
Cultist C has gone through the window and is now in the yard behind Harvey. 
Harvey (H) is in the backyard, about to climb the fence.
Brian (B) is out in front, in the alleyway, having scaled the fence already.
4. Movement actions: Harvey has 1 movement action and is the slowest character in the chase. Cultists A and B both 
get 3 movement actions (1 default, plus 2 more for having MOV speeds of 2 more than Harvey). Brian gets 4 movement 
actions (1 default, plus 3 more for having a MOV speed of 3 more than Harvey). Cultist C gets 5 movement actions (1 
default, plus 4 more for having a MOV speed of 4 more than Harvey).
5. DEX order: Brian has the highest DEX, followed by Harvey, then the cultists. The Keeper is using the same statistics for 
each of the cultists; since they all have the same DEX, it does not matter what order they act in.
Round 1:
Notice how the Keeper has “cut to the chase” (see page 133). Brian, the lead cultist, and Harvey were not required to 
make rolls for climbing out of the window, and Brian is already over the fence. These things are simply allowed to have 
occurred as a result of the speed roll.
CultistA Cultist C Harvey Brian
CultistB
CultistA Cultist C Harvey Brian
CultistB
window fence
===== PDF page index 160 (rulebook p.160) =====
149 
chapter 7: chases
Brian’s turn:
Brian moves first, running 4 spaces up the alley. The Keeper allows for all four spaces to be open locations; the Keeper is 
quite happy to have one investigator trapped, abandoned by his friends!
Harvey’s turn:
Harvey has to climb over the fence (barrier). Knowing the cultists are close behind, he leaps at it heedless of any danger. 
This costs him his only movement action. His Climb skill roll is a failure. Since the Keeper has ruled that the fence is a barrier 
and since Harvey failed his Climb roll, he has not crossed the fence and does not move on. His turn ends. The Keeper does not 
apply any damage for failing to climb the fence—the fact that cultists are about to attack him is sufficient. If Harvey wishes 
to climb over the fence, he must make another attempt next round.
Cultist C’s turn:
Using two of his actions, Cultist C runs across to Harvey and spends a third movement action to attack him (see Part 4: 
Conflict, page 138).
At present, part way through round 1, the Keeper’s map looks like this:
Harvey is struggling to climb the fence when he is attacked by cultist C, and decides to kick out (fight back) at the cultist. 
The cultist attempts a fighting maneuver to grab hold of Harvey and pull him off of the fence. The cultist’s build is 0, the same 
as Harvey’s, so no bonus or penalty dice are awarded for the fighting maneuver.
59 is rolled for Harvey—a Failure.
20 is rolled for the cultist—a Regular success.
The cultist pulls Harvey from the fence, choosing to throw him back one location, into the middle of the yard. The cultist 
has made an attack and cannot initiate another attack this round, even though he has 2 movement actions remaining. He 
uses his fourth movement action to move back to Harvey. Cultist C still has 1 movement action left, but does not wish to 
move further, and his turn ends.
Cultist B’s turn: 
It is now the turn of Cultist B, who requires a skill roll to climb down from the window (one story) to the backyard. Cultist 
B, seeing Harvey lying vulnerable in the yard, takes a reckless approach, jumping from the window rather than climbing. 
The Keeper decides the difficulty level of the climb roll would be Regular, but raises this to Hard difficulty level for a jump. 
The Keeper rolls a failure for the cultist’s Jump skill. Referring to Table III: Other Forms of Damage (page 124), the Keeper 
chooses 1D10 damage as it was an especially dangerous tactic; the Keeper describes how the cultist lands badly, falling short of 
Harvey. This action also cost the cultist 1 (1D3) additional movement action, so he has now used 2 of his movement actions. 
He uses his third movement action to advance 1 location towards Harvey, and his turn ends.
Cultist A ’s turn:
Seeing his friend land badly in the yard outside, Cultist A decides to take a cautious approach (see Hazards, page 134) to 
the climb, spending an additional movement action to gain a bonus die on the Climb roll. He passes the Climb roll and uses 
his third movement action to advance forward 1 location.
At the end of round 1 the Keeper’s map looks like this:
Things do not look good for Harvey. The Keeper rules that Brian has escaped. Harvey is trapped in combat with the 
cultists. The cultists are likely to overpower Harvey and take him captive. 
CultistA
Cultist C
Harvey Brian
CultistB
window fence
CultistA
Cultist C
Harvey
CultistB
window fence
Brian

===== PDF page index 161 (rulebook p.161) =====
150 
Call of Cthulhu

===== PDF page index 162 (rulebook p.162) =====
151 
chapter 7: chases
An Example from "The Call of Cthulhu"
In Lovecraft’s story, Cthulhu is temporarily thwarted as 
Johansen reverses the Alert into him. Could this be done 
with the Call of Cthulhu game rules? Let’s put Johansen in 
the role of an investigator, and decide the boat is Build 22 
and a MOV of 11 (as for a battleship). Cthulhu has Build 22 
and a MOV of 14 (swimming). Both Cthulhu and Johansen 
make their speed rolls and both roll an Extreme success. The 
boat has a MOV of 12, Cthulhu has a MOV of 15. Cthulhu 
acts first in the DEX order and has 4 movement actions each 
round. Johansen goes second with 1 movement action. Let’s 
give Johansen a Pilot (Boat) skill of 70%. Cthulhu’s Fighting 
skill is 100%.
Cthulhu’s turn: Cthulhu uses 2 movement actions to catch 
up with the Alert. With his third movement action he at -
tempts to sink the ship. Johansen responds by fighting back, 
and wishes to use a fighting maneuver. His goal is to, “To 
drive Cthulhu back long enough for me to escape” .  
The Keeper rolls 34 for his Fighting skill—a Hard success 
for Great Cthulhu as he attempts to wreck the ship. The 
player rolls 14—an Extreme success for Johansen’s Pilot Ship 
skill. Johansen wins. The Keeper considers the outcome; the 
aim was to set the enemy back to provide time for escape. 
The Keeper forgoes the damage roll, but rolls 3 (1D3) for 
number of movement actions that Cthulhu loses. The 
Keeper describes how Cthulhu appears to burst, releasing an 
unspeakable stench as of a thousand opened graves. Cthulhu 
is pushed back 1 location, and his final movement action 
this round and his first two next round are lost as a result of 
Johansen’s fighting maneuver.
Johansen’s turn: Johansen has only 1 movement action and 
applies full-steam ahead, accelerating forward through 5 
locations with his one movement action. The Keeper does 
not place any hazards in his way and Johansen is now 6 lo -
cations ahead. As he flees, Johansen looks over his shoulder 
to see Cthulhu nebulously recombining far behind the ship! 
Cthulhu cannot catch him next round and the Keeper rules 
that Johansen has escaped.
Johansen used his steamboat to ram Cthulhu and escape from the Great Old One.