
===== PDF page index 163 (rulebook p.163) =====

===== PDF page index 164 (rulebook p.164) =====

===== PDF page index 165 (rulebook p.165) =====
154 
Call of Cthulhu
nvestigators begin the game sane and rational. 
During their investigations they will encounter 
otherworldly horrors, alien creatures, and 
the terrible cosmic truths of the Cthulhu 
Mythos—all of which will challenge their state 
of mind and sense of normality, and push them to very edge 
of sanity. In some cases, the experience will be too much and 
the unfortunate investigator will descend into periods of 
temporary, indefinite, or even permanent madness.
Each investigator has Sanity points that can rise and 
fall during play. Sanity is used to determine whether the 
investigator can withstand the horrors of the Cthulhu 
Mythos, as well as stand up to fear-inducing situations 
without turning tail and running away. Loss of Sanity points 
can lead to insanity. When Sanity points are reduced to zero, 
an investigator is permanently and incurably insane, and 
ceases to be a player character.
Sanity in the game is modeled after the behavior of 
protagonists in H.P . Lovecraft’s fiction who, more often 
than not, faint or go mad when confronted with mind-
bending physics and monstrous entities from beyond space 
and time. Sanity is the game’s register of the investigator’s 
flexibility and resilience to emotional trauma. Characters 
that start with a high number of Sanity points find it easier to 
rationalize traumatic events or to repress horrific memories. 
Those with a lower number of Sanity points are mentally 
fragile and more susceptible to emotional upset. While the 
cosmic horror of the Cthulhu Mythos is the fundamental 
assault on the mind of an investigator, other gruesome and 
comparatively ordinary sights and events can also cause 
emotional disturbance.
In an unnerving or horrifying situation the Keeper will 
test the resiliency and emotional strength of the investigators. 
This is done by calling for a Sanity roll for each investigator 
entangled in the situation. Investigator insanity is triggered 
when too many Sanity points are lost in too short a time, 
causing temporary or indefinite insanity. 
Sanity Points  
and SAN Rolls
Sanity points should be tracked carefully, as the number 
can change up and down throughout the game. When 
investigators encounter a sanity-threatening situation, 
the Keeper may call for a Sanity roll. Each player whose 
investigator experiences this source of horror rolls 1D100. A 
success is a roll equal to or less than the investigator’s current 
Sanity points. Bonus dice and penalty dice are not applied to 
Sanity rolls (with one exception, Self-Help, page 167). 
Note: If using the optional rule for spending Luck points, 
these may not be spent on Sanity rolls.
A successful roll means that the investigator loses no Sanity 
points, or only a minimal amount. A failed Sanity roll always 
means the investigator loses Sanity points. The amount lost 
depends on the spell, book, entity, or situation encountered. 
In published Call of Cthulhu scenarios, Sanity loss rolls 
are shown as two numbers or rolls separated by a slash, for 
instance: SAN 1/1D4+1. The number to the left of the slash 
is the number of Sanity points lost if the Sanity roll succeeds. 
The die roll to the right of the slash is the number of Sanity 
points lost if the Sanity roll is failed. Sometimes this may be 
written as SAN 0/1D4; in this particular case, a successful 
Sanity roll means no Sanity points are lost, but if the roll is 
failed, the investigator loses 1D4 Sanity points.
Failing a Sanity roll always causes the investigator to lose 
self-control for a moment, at which point the Keeper should 
choose an involuntary action for the investigator. For example:
T Jump in fright —causing the investigator to drop 
something (spectacles, flashlight, gun, book, etc.)
T Cry out in terror—drawing attention, saying some-
thing inappropriate.
T Involuntary movement —swerving the steering 
wheel dangerously to one side, throwing up one’s 
hands in horror, cringing.
T Involuntary combat action—if a Sanity roll is failed 
during a combat round, the investigator’s action 
for that round may be dictated by the Keeper; for 
example, lashing out with a fist, squeezing a trigger, 
taking shelter behind someone else.
T Freeze—stare disbelievingly for a moment but take 
no action.
A fumbled Sanity roll results in the character losing the 
maximum Sanity points for that particular situation or encounter.
The Mythos is anathema to the human mind.

===== PDF page index 166 (rulebook p.166) =====
155 
chapter 8: sanity
Losing more than a few Sanity points at one time may 
cause an investigator to go insane, as described later.
When encountering one ghoul, the Sanity point loss is 
0/1D6. It is the same when encountering multiple ghouls; the 
sanity effect is for the encounter rather than each ghoul seen. 
Maximum Sanity
The threat of insanity in Call of Cthulhu  characterizes the 
Cthulhu Mythos in a way that allows no compromise. 
Exposed to it, few sane humans freely choose the Mythos, 
for the Mythos is intrinsically loathsome and foul. The 
connection of Sanity points and Cthulhu Mythos skill points 
emphasizes the power of the Mythos, which corrupts and 
ruins by proximity and association. 
An investigator’s Sanity points may rise and fall during 
play; however, they may never rise above the character’s 
maximum Sanity rating. Each investigator has a maximum 
Sanity point value that begins at 99. Knowledge of the 
Cthulhu Mythos always lowers an investigator’s maximum 
Sanity points. Maximum Sanity points equal 99 minus 
current Cthulhu Mythos points (99–Cthulhu Mythos skill). 
When gaining Cthulhu Mythos skill points, the player 
should decrease the investigator’s maximum Sanity by the 
same amount.
Insanity 
From that point forward my impressions are scarcely to be 
relied on—indeed, I still possess a final, desperate hope that 
they all form parts of some daemonic dream or illusion born 
of delirium. A fever raged in my brain, and everything came 
to me through a kind of haze—sometimes only intermittently.
—H.P . Lovecraft, The Shadow Out of Time
In Call of Cthulhu, insanity is induced by traumatic experiences 
and the ghastly comprehension that connects to the Cthulhu 
Mythos. The duration of the insane state depends upon the 
number or proportion of Sanity points lost. 
Three states of insanity can result: temporary, indefinite, 
and permanent.
Regardless of whether the insanity is temporary or 
indefinite, it will consist of three distinct game phases:
First: the insanity begins with a brief “bout of madness, ” during 
which the player’s control of their investigator is compromised 
(see Insanity Phase 1: A Bout of Madness, page 156). 
Second: the bout of madness is followed by a period of 
underlying insanity, during which the player retains full 
control of their investigator; however, the investigator is 
prone to delusions, phobias, and further bouts of madness 
(see Insanity Phase 2: Underlying Insanity, page 158). 
Third: the final phase is recovery (see Treatment and Re-
covery from Insanity, page 164).
Temporary Insanity 
If an investigator loses 5 or more Sanity points from a 
single source of Sanity loss (e.g. a Sanity roll or reading a 
tome) sufficient emotional trauma has been suffered that 
the Keeper must test the investigator’s sanity.  The Keeper 
asks for an Intelligence (INT) roll. If the roll is failed,  
 
Harvey Walters follows a trail into a crypt, where he 
finds a ghoul feasting on forbidden fruits among the 
coffins. The Keeper calls for a Sanity roll. Harvey has 
45 Sanity points and his player rolls 83—a failed roll. 
The Keeper describes Harvey’s involuntary gasp of 
horror. The player picks up 1D6, rolls a 4, and reduces 
Harvey’s Sanity points by 4 points (45–4 = 41 Sanity 
points remaining).
Harvey Walters spends some time perusing ancient 
tomes, gaining 3% Cthulhu Mythos skill. His player 
adds 3 points to Harvey’s Cthulhu Mythos skill and 
decreases his maximum Sanity from 99 to 96.
 Examples of Sanity  
Point Costs
0/1D2 Surprised to find mangled animal carcass. 0/1D3  Surprised to find a corpse or body part. 0/1D4  See a stream flow with blood. 1/1D4+1  Find a horrifically mangled human corpse. 0/1D6  Awake trapped in a coffin. 0/1D6  Witness a friend’s violent death. 0/1D6  See a ghoul. 1/1D6+1  Meet someone you know to be dead. 0/1D10  Undergo severe torture. 1/1D10  See a corpse rise from its grave. 2/2D10+1  See gigantic severed head fall from sky. 1D10/1D100  See Great Cthulhu. 

===== PDF page index 167 (rulebook p.167) =====
156 
Call of Cthulhu
the investigator has repressed the memory (a trick the mind 
uses to protect itself), and does not become insane. Perversely, 
if the INT roll succeeds, the investigator recognizes the full 
significance of what has been seen or experienced and goes 
temporarily insane. The effects of temporary insanity begin 
immediately and last for 1D10 hours.
Indefinite Insanity 
On losing a fifth or more of current Sanity points in one 
game “day, ” the investigator becomes indefinitely insane. No 
investigator is simply able to shrug off this amount of sanity 
drain. A “day” in this instance is defined by the Keeper, 
usually lasting until the investigator reaches a place of safety 
in which they can rest and recover their wits. Depending on 
the situation, it may mean surviving until dawn, sitting down 
for a nice cup of tea, or having a good night’s sleep. Indefinite 
insanity lasts until the character is cured or recovers (see 
Recovery from Indefinite Insanity, page 164).
Permanent Insanity 
When Sanity points are reduced to zero the investigator is 
permanently and incurably insane and ceases to be a player 
character. In the real world, all insanity is indefinite insanity, 
since no one in real life can hope to predict the future as 
accurately as a Call of Cthulhu Keeper can. 
Many disorders, especially congenital conditions, offer 
little hope of recovery. Lovecraft concludes more than one 
story with the intimation that a lifetime of madness for the 
narrator will follow. 
Every Keeper must work out what the end-point of 
madness is in the game. Now and then a quiet release might 
be made from a local asylum. Some thin, unnaturally pallid 
person, almost unrecognizable after soul-wracking terrors, 
can walk shyly into downtown Arkham or elsewhere, cast 
keen eyes about, and attempt to regain some semblance of 
his or her former life—however, no player should count on 
such privilege as a right. 
The Effects of Insanity
St John is a mangled corpse; I alone know why, and such is 
my knowledge that I am about to blow out my brains for 
fear I shall be mangled in the same way. Down unlit and 
illimitable corridors of eldritch phantasy sweeps the black, 
shapeless Nemesis that drives me to self-annihilation.
—H. P . Lovecraft, The Hound
Both temporary and indefinite insanity take the investigator 
through two distinct phases of insanity. First, the investigator 
experiences a short bout of madness (phase one). This is then 
followed by a longer period of underlying insanity (phase 
two), which lasts until the investigator has fully recovered 
(hours in the case of temporary insanity, months in the case 
of indefinite insanity).
Insanity Phase 1: A Bout of Madness
Also known as “the red mist, ” “frenzy, ” “freak out, ”  
and “panic attack. ”
On becoming insane, the investigator experiences a bout 
of madness. While experiencing a bout of madness, the 
investigator loses all self-control. In game terms this means 
that control of the investigator is handed from the player to 
the Keeper (for a short amount of real-world time). It is up to 
the Keeper whether this control takes the form of dictating 
specific actions or if it means giving the player guidelines on 
how to play out the madness for however long it may last.
On the upside, the investigator cannot lose further Sanity 
points while experiencing a bout of madness. The mind 
is completely unhinged at this point and any subsequent 
horrors are either forgotten or later believed to be a 
manifestation of the madness. This protection is limited—
the bout of madness lasts 1D10 combat rounds (real time) if 
being played out, but may be longer, in which case the bout 
is summarized by the Keeper.
Each time an investigator suffers a bout of madness, the 
Keeper may amend one of the investigator’s backstory entries 
or add a new one. These alterations serve two purposes. The 
first is to reflect the investigator’s descent into madness by 
adding irrational entries or corrupting existing ones. Second, 
entries can be added or altered to reflect events in the story 
and thus tie the investigator into the plot more strongly. The 
player and Keeper should work together to add or revise 
backstory entries appropriately.
Personal Description: Suitable entries might include “Wild-
eyed, ” “Thousand-yard stare, ” “World-weary, ” or “No longer 
cares for their own appearance” .
Coming to after a Bout of Madness should be disorienting.
===== PDF page index 168 (rulebook p.168) =====
157 
chapter 8: sanity
Ideology/Beliefs: A balanced entry such as “religious” might 
be changed to something more extreme or deranged, such as 
“Unbelievers must be converted or made to suffer” . Alterna-
tively, a new entry that is appropriate to the situation might 
be made, such as “Obsessed with defeating the Cthulhu cult” .
Significant People: A new name might be added together 
with a reason for its inclusion. For example, “Can’t rest until 
Delbert Smith is in his grave, ” or “Robin Poole is the incar-
nation of Ganesh. ”
Meaningful Locations: The present location might take on 
great significance, or the investigator 
might become fixated on reaching anoth-
er location for either rational or irrational 
reasons. The former might be the cult 
temple in the jungle; the latter might be 
an overpowering desire to visit Graceland.
Treasured Possessions:  It is easy to 
lose possessions while one’s mind is 
disrupted by insanity. Any possessions 
might be erased or noted as lost. A new 
possession might be acquired and given 
great significance.
Traits: A trait might be erased or altered 
to something more suitable; for example: 
“bully, ” “drug addict, ” “easily distracted, ” 
“talks too loudly, ” “lack of inhibitions. ”
Injuries & Scars:  These are more usu -
ally altered as a result of major wounds. 
Phobias and Manias: These may result 
from rolls during the bout of madness.
Arcane Tomes, Spells and Artifacts:  
Such items might be lost or destroyed 
in a fit of pique. The investigator might 
involuntarily cast any spells that they 
know, activate artifacts, or study a tome 
that they had previously shunned.
Encounters with Strange Entities:  
Encounters with a monster or deities 
should be recorded here regardless of 
whether insanity results or not. This 
also provides a good place to record the 
amount of Sanity points lost to a partic-
ular type of entity (see Getting Used to 
the Awfulness, page 169).
A bout of madness can take one of 
two forms depending on the situation, 
either in real time (round-by-round) or 
in summary.
A Bout of Madness—Real Time
If the bout of madness happens during a scene in which 
other investigators are present, the bout of madness lasts for 
1D10 combat rounds (note that this is not the full duration 
of the state of insanity—which is 1D10 hours for temporary 
insanity or longer for indefinite insanity). 
The option to play out the bout of madness round-by-
round may be used even when the investigator is alone, or if 
the Keeper thinks it appropriate.
To determine the nature of the bout of madness, either 
roll on Table VII: Bouts of Madness—Real Time , or the 
Keeper may choose an appropriate option.
Table VII: 
Bouts of Madness— 
Real Time (roll 1D10):
1) Amnesia: The investigator has no memory of events that have 
taken place since they were last in a place of safety. For example, it 
seems to them that one moment they were eating breakfast and the 
next they are facing a monster. This lasts for 1D10 rounds.
2) Psychosomatic disability: The investigator suffers psychosomatic 
blindness, deafness, or loss of the use of a limb or limbs for 1D10 rounds.
3) Violence:  A red mist descends on the investigator and they 
explode in a spree of uncontrolled violence and destruction directed 
at their surroundings, allies or foes alike for 1D10 rounds. 
4) Paranoia: The investigator suffers severe paranoia for 1D10 rounds; 
everyone is out to get them; no one can be trusted; they are being spied 
on; someone has betrayed them; what they are seeing is a trick.
5) Significant Person: Review the investigator’s backstory entry 
for Significant People. The investigator mistakes another person in 
the scene for their Significant Person. Consider the nature of the 
relationship; the investigator acts upon it. This lasts 1D10 rounds. 
6) Faint: The investigator faints. They recover after 1D10 rounds.
7) Flee in panic: The investigator is compelled to get as far away as 
possible by whatever means are available, even if it means taking the only 
vehicle and leaving everyone else behind. They travel for 1D10 rounds.
8) Physical hysterics or emotional outburst:  The investigator is 
incapacitated from laughing, crying, screaming, etc. for 1D10 rounds.
9) Phobia: Investigator gains a new phobia. Roll 1D100 on Table IX: 
Sample Phobias, or the Keeper may choose one. Even if the source 
of the phobia is not present, the investigator imagines it is there for 
the next 1D10 rounds.
10) Mania: The investigator gains a new mania. Roll 1D100 on Table 
X: Sample Manias, or the Keeper may choose one. The investigator 
seeks to indulge in their new mania for the next 1D10 rounds.
===== PDF page index 169 (rulebook p.169) =====
158 
Call of Cthulhu
A Bout of Madness—Summary
If the bout of madness happens away from the company of 
other investigators, or if all the investigators present suffer a 
bout of madness simultaneously, the Keeper can simply fast-
forward the action and describe the outcome. The Keeper 
may describe the crazy things that the investigator has done, 
or simply say where the investigator finds him or herself 
when the bout of madness comes to an end. In this way the 
investigator may be lost in madness and thus not under the 
player’s control for minutes or hours (typically 1D10 hours, 
or as the Keeper judges appropriate). Note that these minutes 
or hours are not played out; they are simply summarized by 
the Keeper. The Keeper may just describe the unfamiliar 
place in which the investigator returns to their senses with 
no memory of where they have been or what they have done.
Most of the outcomes require the investigator to leave the 
place where the onset of insanity occurs. If this is not possible 
the Keeper should adapt the outcome accordingly. If there 
is a chance that another investigator might hear or see the 
insane investigator leaving, they should be given a chance to 
intervene. If the insane investigator is confronted by another 
investigator before their bout of madness is over, the Keeper 
should hand control of the investigator back to the player at 
that moment and allow the players to roleplay the scene. This 
may mean that the intended outcome is cut short.
To determine the nature of the bout of madness, either 
roll on Table VIII: Bouts of Madness—Summary  or the 
Keeper may choose an appropriate option.
Insanity Phase 2: Underlying Insanity
Once the initial bout of madness is over, the investigator 
enters a lower-level state of underlying insanity. Control of 
the investigator is placed firmly in the hands of the player, 
who may freely choose how to roleplay being insane. While 
the player is not compelled to do so, aspects of the initial 
bout of madness might be reincorporated for the duration of 
the underlying insanity. 
While in the fragile state of underlying insanity (after the 
initial bout of madness has passed) any further loss of Sanity 
points (even a single point) will result in another bout of 
Harvey is investigating an office at night. Opening a 
locked cabinet, he finds a metal canister. As he touches 
it a metallic voice speaks to him—the voice of a recently 
deceased friend. The player fails a Sanity roll, and 
Harvey loses 6 points of Sanity. The Keeper asks for an 
Intelligence (INT) roll, which Harvey’s player makes 
successfully—Harvey has realized what this means! 
Harvey becomes temporarily insane, beginning a bout 
of madness. As Harvey is alone, the Keeper opts for the 
“summary option” and rolls 4, which indicates some 
form of violence. The Keeper decides that Harvey trash-
es the room in his search for hidden cameras, listening 
devices, and speaker units. The Keeper then describes 
the scene to the player, “When you recover your wits, 
at least 3 hours have passed. You find yourself with 
the contents of the office looking like a bomb has hit it. 
There’s a guy lying on the floor with a bloody wound 
on his head, and he’s either dead or unconscious. ” (This 
is a non-player character—a security guard—that the 
Keeper has thrown in). “The canister is full of bullet 
holes, and you’re holding the smoking barrel of a gun 
to your own temple. ”
Another example: The investigators have retired 
for the evening, each one to their own hotel room. 
Late that night one of the investigators, Kratos, is 
haunted by a spectral figure. Kratos fails his Sanity 
roll and loses 5 Sanity points. His player then rolls 23 
on 1D100, passing his Intelligence roll (INT). Kratos is 
temporarily insane. Kratos is alone, so the Keeper rolls 
1D10 on Table VIII: Bouts of Madness—Summary, 
with a result of 6, which indicates Significant People. 
His backstory states that Kratos is in love with a 
young woman by the name of Alice. At present, Kratos 
is in Paris, while Alice is back in London. The Keeper 
decides that Kratos will flee the hotel and head for the 
train station, boarding the first train for Calais. The 
other investigators might hear Kratos leaving and are 
allowed a Listen roll to do so. One of them succeeds, 
hears Kratos slamming his bedroom door and follows 
him (this would be a good opportunity to use the chase 
rules). The Keeper hands control of Kratos back to the 
player and tells him what Kratos’s bout of madness is 
driving him to do, leaving the rest to the player.
Fleeing in panic during a Bout of Madness.
===== PDF page index 170 (rulebook p.170) =====
159 
chapter 8: sanity
madness. This mental fragility remains for the 
full duration of the insanity—1D10 hours in 
the case of temporary insanity—and probably 
for the duration of the scenario or chapter of 
the campaign in the case of indefinite insanity.
It is important to note that the investigator, 
while insane, may act completely rationally 
and normally, only outwardly presenting their 
insanity during bouts of madness. Further 
advice on roleplaying insane characters is 
provided in Chapter 10: Playing the Game  
(see Failed Sanity Rolls, page 209).
Insanity Side-Effects 1:     
Phobias and Manias
You ask me to explain why I am  
afraid of a draught of cool air
—H.P . Lovecraft, Cool Air
While the investigator is sane, a phobia or 
mania acts solely as a roleplaying trait. For 
example, if the player wishes for his or her 
(sane) investigator to overcome claustrophobia 
and crawl through dark tunnels, the phobia 
won’t prevent this. However, while the same 
investigator is insane, the phobia or mania 
takes on a greater significance. 
Phobic and Manic  
Responses While Insane
Direct exposure (close physical proximity) to 
the subject of the phobia causes panic; equally, 
exposure to the source of a mania causes an 
obsessive reaction. 
For phobias, actions other than fighting or 
fleeing may only be made with one penalty die. 
This penalty does not apply to Sanity rolls or 
reality check rolls.
While in a state of underlying insanity 
(see following), being exposed to the subject 
of their mania will cause an overwhelming 
response in the investigator. If the Keeper 
prompts the player towards some form of 
behavior appropriate to their mania, the 
investigator will suffer one penalty die on all 
dice rolls until the obsession has been indulged 
in some manner, or the investigator is well 
Table VIII : 
Bouts of Madness— 
Summary (roll 1D10):
1) Amnesia: The investigator comes to their senses in some 
unfamiliar place with no memory of who they are. Their memories 
will slowly return to them over time.
2) Robbed: The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours 
later, having been robbed. They are unharmed. If they were carrying 
a Treasured Possession (see investigator backstory), make a Luck 
roll to see if it was stolen. Everything else of value is automatically 
missing.
3) Battered: The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later 
to find themselves battered and bruised. Hit points are reduced to half 
of what they were before going insane, though this does not cause 
a Major wound. They have not been robbed. How the damage was 
sustained is up to the Keeper.
4) Violence: The investigator explodes in a spree of violence and 
destruction. When the investigator comes to their senses, their 
actions may or may not be apparent or remembered. Who or what 
the investigator has inflicted violence upon and whether they have 
killed or simply inflicted harm is up to the Keeper.
5) Ideology/Beliefs: Review the investigator’s backstory entry for 
Ideology and Beliefs. The investigator manifests one of these in an 
extreme, crazed, and demonstrative manner. For example, a religious 
person might be found later, preaching the gospel loudly on the subway.
6) Significant People: Consult the investigator’s backstory entry for 
Significant People and why the relationship is so important. In the time 
that passes (1D10 hours or more) the investigator has done their best 
to get close to that person and act upon their relationship in some way.
7) Institutionalized:  The investigator comes to their senses in a 
psychiatric ward or police cell. They may slowly recall the events that 
led them there.
8) Flee in panic: When the investigator comes to their senses they are 
far away, perhaps lost in the wilderness or on a train or long-distance bus.
9) Phobia: The investigator gains a new phobia. Roll 1D100 on Table 
IX: Sample Phobias, or the Keeper may choose one. The investigator 
comes to their senses 1D10 hours later, having taken every precaution 
to avoid their new phobia.
10) Mania: The investigator gains a new mania. Roll 1D100 on Table 
X: Sample Manias, or the Keeper may choose one. The investigator 
comes to their senses 1D10 hours later. During this bout of madness, 
the investigator will have been fully indulging in their new mania. 
Whether this is apparent to other people is up to the Keeper and player.
Having recovered from his bout of 
madness, Harvey rejoins his friends. 
Harvey’s player now has full control 
over Harvey and decides to play up 
Harvey’s paranoia, constantly checking 
the street for cars and disassembling the 
telephone, looking for bugs.
===== PDF page index 171 (rulebook p.171) =====
160 
Call of Cthulhu
Table IX: Sample Phobias
1) Ablutophobia: Fear of washing or 
bathing.
2) Acrophobia: Fear of heights.
3) Aerophobia: Fear of flying.
4) Agoraphobia: Fear of open, public 
(crowded) places.
5) Alektorophobia: Fear of chickens.
6) Alliumphobia: Fear of garlic
7) Amaxophobia: Fear of being in or 
riding in vehicles.
8) Ancraophobia: Fear of wind.
9) Androphobia: Fear of men. 
10) Anglophobia: Fear of England or 
English culture, etc.
11) Anthophobia: Fear of flowers. 
12) Apotemnophobia: Fear of people 
with amputations.
13) Arachnophobia: Fear spiders.
14) Astraphobia: Fear of lightning. 
15) Atephobia: Fear of ruin or ruins.
16) Aulophobia: Fear of flutes.
17) Bacteriophobia: Fear of bacteria.
18) Ballistophobia: Fear of missiles or 
bullets.
19) Basophobia: Fear of falling.
20) Bibliophobia: Fear of books.
21) Botanophobia: Fear of plants.
22) Caligynephobia: Fear of beautiful 
women.
23) Cheimaphobia: Fear of cold. 
24) Chronomentrophobia: Fear of 
clocks.
25) Claustrophobia: Fear of confined 
spaces.
26) Coulrophobia: Fear of clowns.
27) Cynophobia: Fear of dogs.
28) Demonophobia: Fear of spirits or 
demons.
29) Demophobia: Fear of crowds.
30) Dentophobia: Fear of dentists.
31) Disposophobia: Fear of throwing 
stuff out (hoarding).
32) Doraphobia: Fear of fur.
33) Dromophobia: Fear of crossing 
streets. 
34) Ecclesiophobia: Fear of church.
35) Eisoptrophobia: Fear of mirrors. 
36) Enetophobia: Fear of needles or 
pins.
37) Entomophobia: Fear of insects.
38) Felinophobia: Fear of cats. 
39) Gephyrophobia: Fear of crossing 
bridges.
40) Gerontophobia: Fear of old people 
or of growing old.
41) Gynophobia: Fear of women.
42) Haemaphobia: Fear of blood.
43) Hamartophobia: Fear of sinning.
44) Haphophobia: Fear of touch. 
45) Herpetophobia: Fear of reptiles.
46) Homichlophobia: Fear of fog.
47) Hoplophobia: Fear of firearms.
48) Hydrophobia: Fear of water. 
49) Hypnophobia: Fear of sleep or of 
being hypnotized.
50) Iatrophobia: Fear of doctors.
51) Ichthyophobia: Fear of fish. 
52) Katsaridaphobia: Fear of 
cockroaches.
53) Keraunophobia: Fear of thunder. 
54) Lachanophobia: Fear of vegetables.
55) Ligyrophobia: Fear of loud noises.
56) Limnophobia: Fear of lakes.
57) Mechanophobia: Fear of machines 
or machinery.
58) Megalophobia: Fear of large things.
59) Merinthophobia: Fear of being 
bound or tied up.
60) Meteorophobia: Fear of meteors or 
meteorites.
61) Monophobia: Fear of being alone. 
62) Mysophobia: Fear of dirt or 
contamination.
63) Myxophobia: Fear of slime. 
64) Necrophobia: Fear of dead things. 
65) Octophobia: Fear of the figure 8.
66) Odontophobia: Fear of teeth.
67) Oneirophobia: Fear of dreams.
68) Onomatophobia: Fear of hearing a 
certain word or words.
69) Ophidiophobia: Fear of snakes.
70) Ornithophobia: Fear of birds.
71) Parasitophobia: Fear of parasites. 
72) Pediophobia: Fear of dolls.
73) Phagophobia: Fear of swallowing, 
of eating or of being eaten.
74) Pharmacophobia: Fear of drugs.
75) Phasmophobia: Fear of ghosts.
76) Phenogophobia: Fear of daylight.
77) Pogonophobia: Fear of beards.
78) Potamophobia: Fear of rivers.
79) Potophobia: Fear of alcohol or 
alcoholic beverages.
80) Pyrophobia: Fear of fire.
81) Rhabdophobia: Fear of magic. 
82) Scotophobia: Fear of darkness or of 
the night.
83) Selenophobia: Fear of the moon.
84) Siderodromophobia: Fear of train 
travel.
85) Siderophobia: Fear of stars.
86) Stenophobia: Fear of narrow things 
or places. 
87) Symmetrophobia: Fear of 
symmetry.
88) Taphephobia: Fear of being buried 
alive or of cemeteries. 
89) Taurophobia: Fear of bulls.
90) Telephonophobia: Fear of 
telephones.
91) Teratophobia: Fear of monsters. 
92) Thalassophobia: Fear of the sea.
93) Tomophobia: Fear of surgical 
operations.
94) Triskadekaphobia: Fear of the 
number 13.
95) Vestiphobia: Fear of clothing.
96) Wiccaphobia: Fear of witches and 
witchcraft.
97) Xanthophobia: Fear of the color 
yellow or the word “yellow”.
98) Xenoglossophobia: Fear of foreign 
languages.
99) Xenophobia: Fear of strangers or 
foreigners.
100) Zoophobia: Fear of animals.
A phobia is a lasting irrational fear of something. The Keeper may select randomly (roll 1D100) or choose an appropriate one. 
The Keeper should add the phobia to the investigator’s backstory.

===== PDF page index 172 (rulebook p.172) =====
161 
chapter 8: sanity
Table X: Sample Manias
1) Ablutomania: Compulsion for washing 
oneself.
2) Aboulomania: Pathological indecisiveness.
3) Achluomania: An excessive liking for 
darkness.
4) Acromania (heights): Compulsion for 
high places.
5) Agathomania: Pathological kindness.
6) Agromania: Intense desire to be in open 
spaces.
7) Aichmomania: Obsession with sharp or 
pointed objects.
8) Ailuromania: Abnormal fondness for cats.
9) Algomania: Obsession with pain.
10) Alliomania: Obsession with garlic.
11) Amaxomania: Obsession with being in 
vehicles.
12) Amenomania: Irrational cheerfulness.
13) Anthomania: Obsession with flowers.
14) Arithmomania: Obsessive preoccupation 
with numbers.
15) Asoticamania: Impulsive or reckless 
spending.
16) Automania: An excessive liking for 
solitude.
17) Balletomania: Abnormal fondness for 
ballet.
18) Bibliokleptomania: Compulsion for 
stealing books.
19) Bibliomania: Obsession with books and/
or reading.
20) Bruxomania: Compulsion for grinding 
teeth.
21) Cacodemomania: Pathological belief that 
one is inhabited by an evil spirit.
22) Callomania: Obsession with one’s own 
beauty.
23) Cartacoethes: Uncontrollable compulsion 
to see maps everywhere.
24) Catapedamania: Obsession with jumping 
from high places.
25) Cheimatomania: Abnormal desire for 
cold and/or cold things.
26) Choreomania: Dancing mania or 
uncontrollable frenzy.
27) Clinomania: Excessive desire to stay in 
bed.
28) Coimetromania: Obsession with 
cemeteries.
29) Coloromania: Obsession with a specific 
color.
30) Coulromania: Obsession with clowns.
31) Countermania: Compulsion to experience 
fearful situations.
32) Dacnomania: Obsession with killing.
33) Demonomania: Pathological belief that 
one is possessed by demons.
34) Dermatillomania: Compulsion for picking 
at one’s skin.
35) Dikemania: 0bsession to see justice done.
36) Dipsomania: Abnormal craving for 
alcohol.
37) Doramania: Obsession with owning furs.
38) Doromania: Obsession with giving gifts.
39) Dromomania: Compulsion to walk away 
or wander.
40) Ecdemiomania: Compulsion for 
wandering.
41) Egomania: Irrational self-centered attitude 
or self-worship.
42) Empleomania: Insatiable urge to hold 
office.
43) Enosimania: Pathological belief that one 
has sinned.
44) Epistemomania: Obsession for acquiring 
knowledge.
45) Eremiomania: Compulsion for stillness.
46) Etheromania: Craving for ether.
47) Gamomania: Obsession with issuing odd 
marriage proposals.
48) Geliomania: Uncontrollable compulsion 
to laugh.
49) Goetomania: Obsession with witches and 
witchcraft.
50) Graphomania: Obsession with writing 
everything down.
51) Gymnomania: Compulsion with nudity.
52) Habromania: Abnormal tendency to create 
pleasant delusions (in spite of reality).
53) Helminthomania: An excessive liking for 
worms.
54) Hoplomania: Obsession with firearms.
55) Hydromania: Irrational craving for water.
56) Ichthyomania: Obsession with fish.
57) Iconomania: Obsession with icons or 
portraits.
58) Idolomania: Obsession or devotion to an 
idol.
59) Infomania: Excessive devotion to 
accumulating facts.
60) Klazomania: Irrational compulsion to 
shout.
61) Kleptomania: Irrational compulsion for 
stealing.
62) Ligyromania: Uncontrollable compulsion 
to make loud or shrill noises.
63) Linonomania: Obsession with string.
64) Lotterymania: An extreme desire to take 
part in lotteries.
65) Lypemania: An abnormal tendency 
toward deep melancholy.
66) Megalithomania: Abnormal tendency 
to compose bizarre ideas when in the 
presence of stone circles/standing stones.
67) Melomania: Obsession with music or a 
specific tune.
68) Metromania: Insatiable desire for writing 
verse.
69) Misomania: Hatred of everything, 
obsession of hating some subject or 
group.
70) Monomania: Abnormal obsession with a 
single thought or idea.
71) Mythomania: Lying or exaggerating to an 
abnormal extent.
72) Nosomania: Delusion of suffering from 
an imagined disease.
73) Notomania: Compulsion to record 
everything (e.g. photograph).
74) Onomamania: Obsession with names 
(people, places, things).
75) Onomatomania: Irresistible desire to 
repeat certain words.
76) Onychotillomania: Compulsive picking 
at the fingernails.
77) Opsomania: Abnormal love for one kind 
of food.
78) Paramania: An abnormal pleasure in 
complaining.
79) Personamania: Compulsion to wear 
masks.
80) Phasmomania: Obsession with ghosts.
81) Phonomania: Pathological tendency to 
murder.
82) Photomania: Pathological desire for light.
83) Planomania: Abnormal desire to disobey 
social norms.
84) Plutomania: Obsessive desire for wealth.
85) Pseudomania: Irrational compulsion for 
lying.
86) Pyromania: Compulsion for starting fires.
87) Question-Asking Mania: Compulsive 
urge to ask questions.
88) Rhinotillexomania: Compulsive nose 
picking.
89) Scribbleomania: Obsession with 
scribbling/doodling.
90) Siderodromomania: Intense fascination 
with trains and railroad travel.
91) Sophomania: The delusion that one is 
incredibly intelligent.
92) Technomania: Obsession with new 
technology.
93) Thanatomania: Belief that one is cursed 
by death magic.
94) Theomania: Belief that he or she is a god.
95) Titillomaniac: Compulsion for scratching  
oneself.
96) Tomomania: Irrational predilection for 
performing surgery.
97) Trichotillomania: Craving for pulling out 
own hair.
98) Typhlomania: Pathological blindness.
99) Xenomania: Obsession with foreign 
things.
100) Zoomania: Insane fondness for animals.
A mania results in an obsession or compulsion with its subject. The Keeper may select randomly (roll 1D100) or choose an 
appropriate one. The Keeper should add the mania to the investigator’s backstory.
===== PDF page index 173 (rulebook p.173) =====
162 
Call of Cthulhu
out of range of the stimulus. For example, while in a place 
that serves alcohol, a dipsomaniac would take one penalty 
die on all rolls unless taking a drink. Of course characters 
who fully succumb to their drug craving will be subject to 
the drug’s effects, such as drunkenness or altered states of 
consciousness. In such situations the Keeper may alter the 
level of difficulty of certain skill rolls (or impose a penalty 
die on opposed skill rolls) depending on the situation and 
state of the character.
Successful use of the Psychoanalysis skill upon an insane 
investigator enables the insane investigator to temporarily 
ignore a phobia or mania (see Chapter 4: Skills).
Insanity Side-Effects 2:  
Delusions and Reality Checks
Where does madness leave off and reality begin? Is it possible 
that even my latest fear is sheer delusion? 
—H.P . Lovecraft, The Shadow Over Innsmouth
While not in control of the investigator’s actions, the Keeper 
is free to present an investigator suffering underlying 
insanity with delusional sensory information at any time. 
The only way for the player to be sure of what his or her 
insane investigator is seeing, hearing, touching, feeling or 
smelling is to make a “Reality Check” . 
Delusions have greater impact when they have some 
relevance to the investigator. A great way to do this is to 
refer to the investigator’s backstory and use some aspect as 
inspiration for delusions. An investigator’s late spouse calling 
on the telephone is much more engaging than random 
delusions. Delusions can also make great consequences when 
a player of an investigator suffering underlying insanity fails 
a Pushed skill roll.
Reality Check Rolls
While reality checks are only usually called for on behalf of 
insane investigators, a player might call for one if they wish 
to “see through” what they believe to be a hallucination 
or illusion. To perform a reality check, the player makes a 
Sanity roll:
Harvey has developed Selenophobia (fear of the 
moon). On exiting a theater with friends, the sight of 
the moon gives him a chill. Harvey is sane at present. 
His player describes Harvey’s nervous disposition and 
his relief when he arrives home and closes the curtains. 
A week later, Harvey, now suffering underlying 
insanity, finds himself in a similar situation and 
chooses to flee home to safety. On his way home, 
Harvey is followed by a sinister-looking individual. 
The Keeper offers a Spot Hidden roll to Harvey’s 
player to determine if Harvey notices his pursuer. 
Since this roll has nothing to do with either fighting 
or fleeing, and Harvey is still exposed to the source 
of his phobia, one penalty die is applied to his Spot 
Hidden roll. Only when Harvey is safely in doors and 
the moon is out of sight will this penalty cease.
A threat of the Mythos or just a nice old lady?
===== PDF page index 174 (rulebook p.174) =====
163 
chapter 8: sanity
Failure: lose 1 Sanity point. This will immediately induce a 
bout of madness if the investigator is suffering underlying 
insanity. Any delusions are not dispelled. 
Success: the investigator sees through any delusions, and 
the Keeper must describe what the investigator genuinely 
perceives.
On making a successful reality check roll, the 
investigator should see things as they really are and will 
be resistant to delusions until losing further Sanity points 
(thus preventing the Keeper from constantly throwing 
delusions at a player). 
Successful use of the Psychoanalysis skill will allow an 
insane investigator to see a delusion for what it is.
Insanity Side-Effects 3: Insanity and 
the Cthulhu Mythos 
What I have seen cannot be true, and I know that this 
madness of my own will at most lead only to suffocation 
when my air is gone. The light in the temple is a sheer 
delusion, and I shall die calmly like a German, in the black 
and forgotten depths. This demoniac laughter which I hear as 
I write comes only from my own weakening brain.
—H. P . Lovecraft, The Temple
Insanity bought on by non-Mythos stimuli yields no Cthulhu 
Mythos knowledge. However, each time an investigator reels 
from Mythos-induced trauma (e.g. seeing a Mythos monster, 
Harvey, still suffering from underlying insanity, 
returns to his home. Going out of his back door, 
he finds his neighbor leaning over the garden fence 
with some kind of recording device in his hand, 
pointed at Harvey’s house. The Keeper tells Harvey’s 
player that Harvey’s neighbor is spying on him. This 
is a delusion—in fact the neighbor is doing no such 
thing. The player, wondering if this is a delusion, 
asks for a reality check.
With a successful reality check roll, Harvey is 
free of his delusion. The Keeper cannot continue the 
delusion and must describe the scene realistically. 
In this case, there was no recording device and the 
neighbor was simply admiring Harvey’s lawn.
If the player chooses to make a reality check roll 
and fails, Harvey will lose 1 Sanity point and suffer 
a bout of madness. As he is the only investigator 
present, the Keeper is free to fast-forward to the 
point where another investigator (or the police) 
turns up to find Harvey coming out of his own front 
door, armed with a shotgun, determined to break 
into his neighbor’s house and interrogate him, or 
worse.
If the player does not choose to ask for a reality 
check, the Keeper is free to elaborate on the delusion, 
perhaps stating that Harvey sees his neighbor 
conversing with a ghoul (actually the neighbor’s 
child) on the patio. At this point the player would 
have to either make a Sanity roll for seeing a ghoul 
or make a reality check roll. If she succeeds in the 
reality check, Harvey will realize there is no ghoul 
and that he was imagining it all. If she fails, Harvey 
will lose a point of Sanity, suffer a bout of madness, 
and terrible things will no doubt ensue.
 Phobia
When exposed to the source of their phobia, or even just 
thinking about it, a character’s symptoms can develop 
rapidly. Within seconds, palpitations, trembling, choking, 
and an uncontrollable anxiety appear. The character feels 
that they must do everything possible to avoid the situation.
Mania
A character with a mania will have a fairly constant 
euphoric or possibly irritable mood. Symptoms include a 
general increase in activity, garrulousness, increased self-
esteem to the point of delusion, decreased need for sleep, 
easily distracted, willingness for dangerous or imprudent 
activities such as reckless driving, hallucinations, delusions, 
and bizarre behavior. 
Compulsion
Compulsions tend to be ritual actions performed to 
affect the future, possibly to prevent some vague notion 
of impending doom. Though the character may agree 
the actions are senseless, the need to perform them is 
overpowering. Even in times of great stress, the character 
may ignore his or her survival in order to perform the ritual. 
Amnesia
An inability to recall important personal information, 
brought on by a desire to avoid unpleasant memories. The 
character may just forget the bad experience that caused 
the amnesia or they could forget major chunks of time, or 
even everything about themselves. The Keeper may choose 
to reset Cthulhu Mythos to 0 and maximum Sanity to 99 
while the amnesia holds sway; the horror returns when 
the character’s memories do, or when they experience a 
similarly horrific situation.

===== PDF page index 175 (rulebook p.175) =====
164 
Call of Cthulhu
reading a Mythos tome, being affected by a Mythos spell), he 
or she learns more of the Mythos, and this is reflected in the 
Cthulhu Mythos skill. The first instance of Mythos-related 
insanity always adds 5 points to the Cthulhu Mythos skill. 
Further episodes of Mythos-induced insanity (temporary or 
indefinite) each add 1 point to the skill. 
Treatment and 
Recovery from Insanity
Temporary insanity ends quickly enough that schedules of 
treatment are not realistic. On the other hand, treatment 
of permanent insanity mostly has no meaning, since by 
definition the character will never recover, no matter how 
good the facility (the character should be retired from play). 
Only indefinite insanity offers real scope for intervention 
and treatment.
Recovery from  
Temporary Insanity
Temporary insanity lasts 1D10 hours. Alternatively, the 
investigator will recover after a good night’s sleep in a 
safe place. If the investigators are in a state of heightened 
tension (for example, standing watch at night due to fear of 
imminent attack), the Keeper may deem that sanity cannot 
be recovered.
Recovery from 
Indefinite Insanity
After each month of treatment of an indefinitely insane 
character, safe from further trauma, the player makes a dice 
roll. Two sorts of care might help to get the character to this 
point: private care or institutionalization. In choosing, the 
Keeper and player should consider the character’s resources, 
friends and relatives, and past behavior.
Alternatively, at the Keeper’s discretion, indefinite 
insanity lasts until the next Investigator Development Phase 
at the end of the present game chapter (in a campaign) or 
scenario.
Private Care
The best care available is at home or in some friendly place 
where nursing can be tender, considerate, and where there 
are no distractions (such as other patients). Analysis and/or 
psychiatric medications may be available.
To determine the success of treatment with private/home 
care, roll 1D100:
A result of 01–95 is a success:  add 1D3 Sanity points for 
psychiatric medications or psychoanalysis. This is followed 
by a Sanity roll for the investigator; if the roll is successful, 
the investigator is cured of their insanity; if the roll is unsuc-
cessful then a further Sanity roll may be attempted in one 
month’s time.
If the result is 96–100:  the character rebels against taking 
the drugs or therapy. 1D6 Sanity points are lost and no 
further progress can be made during the next game month.
A Note about Delusions  
and Sanity Point Loss
The delusion of a sanity-threatening entity (e.g. a 
monster) may cause an investigator the same potential 
Sanity point loss as the real thing. The player has a 
choice: either accept what is seen as “real” and make 
the appropriate Sanity roll for seeing that monster, or 
make a reality check roll. If the player makes a successful 
reality check roll and dispels the delusion, no Sanity 
roll needs to be made—there was no monster after all, 
perhaps just a tramp who appeared to be a monster 
in the eyes of the insane investigator. However, if the 
player fails the reality check roll, the insane investigator 
loses one Sanity point and enters a bout of madness. 
Note that while suffering a bout of madness the 
investigator is immune to further Sanity point loss and 
need not make a Sanity roll for seeing the monster. If 
the monster (delusion or not) is still present at the end 
of the bout of madness, the player will then have to 
make the appropriate Sanity roll for seeing the monster.
Harvey Walters finds a manuscript in Crowninshield 
Manor. After comprehending it, he has 3% Cthulhu 
Mythos skill but lost no Sanity points. When he steps 
outside, Harvey sees a nightgaunt fly overhead. He 
goes insane, his mind quailing before the unearthly 
manifestation. Since this is Harvey’s first Mythos-
related insanity, his player must add 5 percentiles 
to Harvey’s Cthulhu Mythos skill, raising it to 8%. 
Harvey’s maximum Sanity points drops to 91 (99 
minus 8 Cthulhu Mythos skill).

===== PDF page index 176 (rulebook p.176) =====
165 
chapter 8: sanity
Institutionalization
The next best care is committal to an insane asylum. 
Asylums may be said to have an advantage over home 
care in that they are relatively cheap, or even a free service 
provided by the state. These institutions are of uneven 
quality and some may be potentially harmful. Some are 
creative places of experiment and advanced therapy, while 
others merely offer rude confinement. 
Supervised activity, manual therapy, psychiatric 
medications, and hydrotherapy are frequent, as is 
electroconvulsive treatment (dependent on the period 
within which your game is set). 
Psychoanalysis is unlikely to be available. Sometimes an 
institution may convey an uncaring sense that undermines the 
useful effects of psychiatric medications, leaving the investigator 
with a sense of anger and loss, and likely to be distrustful of 
outpatient support once he or she has left the institution.
To determine the success of treatment within an 
institution, roll 1D100:
A result of 01–50* is a success:  add 1D3 Sanity points for 
psychiatric medications and/or therapy. This is followed by 
a Sanity roll, if the Sanity roll is successful, the investigator 
is cured of their insanity; if the roll is unsuccessful then a 
further Sanity roll may be attempted in one month’s time.
If the result is 51–95: no progress has been made.
If the result is 96–100:  the character rebels against taking 
the drugs or therapy. 1D6 Sanity points are lost, and no 
progress can be made during the next game month.
*50 is an average rating. The Keeper may determine that 
the standard of an institution is above or below average, and 
so raise or lower this value within the range of 5 to 95.
Commitment to an Asylum 
Investigators may want to stay at an asylum or sanitarium, 
perhaps to gather information, hide from someone, or even 
to receive treatment. They should have little trouble entering 
if they can pay for the care. A private institution with an 
available room will accept someone without symptoms who 
merely wishes a rest and counseling. All institutions ask for 
references, however.
A medical practitioner licensed within the state 
can arrange that an investigator be held for psychiatric 
observation for up to 72 hours. If evidence of serious disorder 
is gathered, the patient may be placed in an asylum for a 
longer period, for purposes of observation and evaluation as 
spelled out by law. Then the court will discharge or commit 
for treatment depending on the asylum’s report.
Those committed for treatment are subject to review, 
but they may be in an institution for many years. It requires 
Sanity Loss
The following is a guide for how the loss of Sanity 
points might be characterized and can be used to 
complement and add color to the other rules described 
in this chapter (note that the effects may accumulate).
1—2 points:  discomfort and unease, something 
gnawing at the corner of the mind—hardly noticeable, 
yet definitely there.
3—4 points: disgust, or the feeling that something is 
wrong here. This may manifest in vomiting, momentary 
stupefaction, or shivering.
5—9 points: fear, panic, or disorientation—enough to 
cause a potential episode of temporary insanity. This 
represents a major shock leading to uncontrollable 
physical reactions (violent body ticks, extreme nausea, 
etc.) and/or disassociation with surroundings and people.
10—19 points: mind-warping horror—hair changes 
to white, violent physical reaction (to self and/
or others), physical and mental shutdown, sudden 
character change (temporary), raving and delusions, or 
propensity to either violence or total fear.
20+ points: ultimate cosmic evil—beyond humanity’s 
ability to comprehend. The mind is broken and will 
take a long time to return to sanity, and even if a way 
can be found, the person will never be the same again. 
Results in certain indefinite insanity.
"Bahaha! A three-lobed burning eye! Ahahaha!"
===== PDF page index 177 (rulebook p.177) =====
166 
Call of Cthulhu
another formal presentation to the court, in which an 
investigator would have to be found mentally incompetent 
to act on his or her own behalf, or else might voluntarily 
surrender specific legal rights in return for treatment. The 
soundness of these proceedings can vary widely; brusque  
pro forma evaluations are not unusual, and much depends 
upon the character and dedication of judge, counsel, and 
examining physician or physicians.
If the court decides for mental incompetence then a 
responsible guardian is chosen, who thereafter in theory acts 
to benefit the individual. Normally the guardian is a relative 
or someone whom the court has reason to assume will act 
in the individual’s best regard. Lacking other candidates, the 
court appoints itself.
Unless the investigator is criminally insane (in which 
case the court must be the guardian), the guardian now 
decides what is best for the investigator. This may indeed be 
commitment, but it might also be home care, or a therapeutic 
sea voyage, etc. Lacking other indication, the court will 
accept any reasonable plan that seems to have the backing 
of medical opinion.
If the guardian commits the investigator to an institution, 
the guardian continues to have general authority over the 
investigator, assigning day-to-day care and authority with 
the sanitarium staff. Thereafter, the investigator has three 
ways to leave: he or she may convince the guardian to remove 
him or her from the institution; he or she may convince the 
institution’s staff to bring notice of his or her restored mental 
balance before the awarding court and that court takes upon 
itself the guardianship and grants his or her freedom; or he 
or she can simply climb over the institution’s wall and run 
for his or her life.
Mental Health  
Dangerousness Criteria 
When a person seems to be at risk of self-harm or for 
harm to others, and apparently cannot care for him- or 
herself, a medical doctor can certify that the individual 
should undergo psychiatric assessment and/or become 
an involuntary patient. With this affirmation, often of a 
comprehensive nature, the state can hold an individual for 
observation and potentially for treatment. The duration of 
institutionalization varies by state, but the term is rarely less 
than 60 game days for a legal assessment, and frequently up 
to 180 days. 
This fate is most likely for an investigator who attempts 
bodily assault or murder without apparent motive, or who 
intelligently shams mental disturbance to avoid serious 
criminal charges. The doctor also can revoke the capacity to 
manage personal finances, the right to drive an automobile, 
the right to make treatment decisions, and so on.
Arrested after breaking into a construction site 
and attempting to steal dynamite, Harvey Walters 
continually babbles about saving the world from the 
Cthulhu cult and the forces of the Mythos, especially 
the evil wizard Carl Stanford. The court decides to 
have Harvey assessed by a local psychiatrist. Dr. Shiny 
listens carefully during an interview then decides to 
make Harvey an involuntary patient. 
Dr. Shiny lists his reasons: (1) Harvey poses a 
risk to others, especially Carl Stanford; (2) Harvey 
poses a danger to himself, having stolen the dynamite 
and blasting caps; and (3) Harvey has a psychiatric 
disorder, in the form of delusions concerning cultists 
and the Cthulhu Mythos. 
While taking Harvey’s history, Dr. Shiny learns 
that recently Harvey has been in five car accidents 
involving chases, as well as one hit-and-run. Of the 
last, Harvey explains that he had to run over an 
evil cultist. Dr. Shiny therefore also declares Harvey 
unfit to drive. But he finds that Harvey is financially 
competent, able to explain all his assets and how 
he earns money, and so Harvey retains the right 
to continue to manage his own financial affairs. 
Nonetheless, Harvey Walters is committed to the 
institute for assessment. 
 A few nights later, Harvey escapes from the 
institute and heads toward Arkham. Naturally Dr. 
Shiny wants to protect all involved, so he notifies the 
police. He also calls Carl Stanford regarding the escape. 
“Yes, Mr. Stanford, Harvey may be dangerous . . . ”
Dr. Shiny
===== PDF page index 178 (rulebook p.178) =====
167 
chapter 8: sanity
Increasing  
Current Sanity Points 
In addition to the care listed above, there are four ways to 
raise an investigator’s current Sanity points.
1. Keeper award: at the end of a successful scenario or 
campaign chapter, Keepers may specify dice rolls to increase 
investigators’ current Sanity points. Keeper award rolls are the 
same for all participants, but are rolled individually by players. 
Such rewards should be proportional to the danger the group 
faced. However, if the investigators were cowardly, brutal, 
or murderous, the Keeper may opt to reduce or remove the 
reward, especially if they wish to enforce a moral agenda.
2. Increasing a Skill to 90%:  award 2D6 Sanity points when 
a character increases a skill to 90%. This reward represents 
the discipline and self-esteem gained in mastering a skill.
3. Psychotherapy: intensive psychoanalysis can return Sanity 
points to an investigator patient. Make a 1D100 roll against 
the analyst or doctor’s Psychoanalysis skill once per month. 
If the roll succeeds, the patient gains 1D3 Sanity points. If 
the roll fails, add no points. If the roll is fumbled then the 
patient loses 1D6 Sanity points, and treatment by that analyst 
concludes—there has been some sort of serious incident or 
dramatic setback in the therapy, and the relationship between 
patient and therapist has broken down beyond saving.
In the game, psychoanalysis alone does not speed 
recovery from insanity; however, it can strengthen the 
investigator by increasing Sanity points, providing a larger 
reserve for the active days to come. Recovery is independent 
of Sanity points. The use of psychoanalysis is different in 
the game world than in the real world. In the real world, 
psychoanalysis will not work against the symptoms of 
schizophrenia, psychotic disorders, bipolar disorders (manic 
depression) or severe depression. Psychoanalysis is the 
game’s equivalent of mental first aid and is a world removed 
from real-life medical care for mental illness. 
While in game terms, temporary and indefinite 
insanity can be cured, permanent insanity is impervious 
to psychoanalysis. Participation is impossible when the 
investigator’s mind is in such disarray.
Therapy can also be used to remove a phobia or mania. At the 
end of a month the analyst rolls for success in the same manner 
as detailed above. If successful, the investigator then makes a 
Sanity roll. If both rolls are successful the phobia or mania is 
cured and erased from the investigator’s backstory. This benefit 
replaces the Sanity point gain and no such points are awarded. 
Failure of either of the rolls bestows no benefit. Fumbling either 
of the rolls results in a loss of 1D6 Sanity points (as above).
4. Self-help: an investigator may choose to spend time with 
one entry listed in their backstory which could act as a form 
of psychological support; clearly this does not include pho -
Harvey uses his knowledge of the Cthulhu Mythos to 
defeat the ghouls, and his adventure ends. The Keeper 
gives a Sanity point reward of 1D6.
Seeing the shriveled body of a friend is likely to call for a Sanity roll.
===== PDF page index 179 (rulebook p.179) =====
168 
Call of Cthulhu

===== PDF page index 180 (rulebook p.180) =====
169 
chapter 8: sanity
bias, manias, wounds or anything to do with the Cthulhu 
Mythos. This may be done during downtime between ad -
ventures or during the investigator development phase. 
The player should go into some detail about what 
their investigator is doing to seek healing or redemption. 
The actions should be thematically appropriate to their 
backstory; perhaps the investigator is going on a religious 
retreat or a holiday with a loved one. 
The player then makes a Sanity roll. Keeper and players are 
encouraged to roleplay the scene to the point where it comes to 
a head, and then make the Sanity roll, roleplaying the outcome. 
If the roll is successful, the investigator gains 1D6 Sanity points. 
If it is unsuccessful, 1 Sanity point is lost, and the Keeper and 
player should revise that aspect of the investigator’s backstory in 
some way to reflect the failure. Thus the religious retreat might 
result in a complete loss of religious faith, or a family holiday 
might result in separation or divorce. 
Each investigator begins the game with one backstory 
entry that is especially important to them: this is their “key 
connection” . If the player chooses to use their investigator’s 
key connection, they are granted a bonus die when making 
their Sanity roll. In addition to the 1D6 Sanity points gained 
for a successful Sanity roll, the investigator will recover from 
any indefinite insanity. If the Sanity roll is failed, that aspect 
of the investigator’s backstory is revised, and that investigator 
no longer has a key connection. 
In time, the investigator may form a new key connection. 
During a future investigator development phase, a backstory 
aspect may be converted into a new key connection if the 
player successfully uses the “self-help” option to regain Sanity 
points via that connection. Alternatively, any Sanity roll of 
01 (critical success) allows for the immediate nomination of 
a new key connection to replace the one that was lost.
Note: Current Sanity points can never increase above an 
investigator’s maximum Sanity (99–Cthulhu Mythos skill). 
Getting Used to the  
Awfulness 
At some point, constant exposure to the same Mythos 
creature has no further effect—the monster is no longer 
a living nightmare, but rather another obstacle in the 
investigator’s path. Once an investigator has lost as many 
Sanity points for seeing a particular sort of monster as the 
maximum possible Sanity point loss for that monster, he 
or she should not lose more Sanity points for a reasonable 
interval. For instance, no investigator could lose more than 6 
Sanity points for encountering deep ones (0/1D6 SAN), even 
if a hundred of them were seen at once. 
But be warned! Investigators never truly get used to seeing 
alien obscenities. After a time, perhaps once the investigator’s 
life has returned to some form of normalcy, the sense of horror 
can rise up anew. A player should keep track of the Sanity 
points lost to any given Mythos entity. With every investigator 
development phase (see page 94), the player should reduce all 
those numbers by 1—time is a great healer.
Optional Rules
Insane Insight
When an investigator goes insane (either temporarily or 
indefinitely), he or she has a momentary insane insight. 
This moment of clarity provides a clue or action that might 
benefit the investigator(s) immediately or at some later 
stage. The Keeper should determine an appropriate insight 
relevant to the plot of the scenario.
Mythos Hardened
When an investigator’s Cthulhu Mythos skill rises above 
the value of his or her Sanity score a turning point has been 
reached. That investigator’s understanding of the universe 
undergoes a paradigm shift that results in a permanent 
change to their personality and comprehension of their place 
in the cosmos. How this is portrayed is left open to the player. 
The player may decide that his or her investigator’s mind is 
inured to the horror, no longer cares, or has a more profound 
understanding that is no longer shaken by the truth. From 
that point onward, all Sanity point loss is halved. Once this 
change has taken place it is permanent and will not revert 
if the investigator’s Sanity should rise above their Cthulhu 
Mythos knowledge.
Multiple Sanity rolls
The rules state that the Sanity point loss for a monster remains 
the same whether one monster or a multiple monsters are 
encountered. One option that ramps up Sanity point loss is 
to ask the player to roll Sanity loss once for each monster and 
then use the highest number rolled. This approach works well 
when multiple monsters of different types are encountered 
simultaneously.
Harvey has lost a total of 6 Sanity points as a result of 
encounters with deep ones. Harvey cannot lose more 
Sanity points through seeing deep ones at present. 
However, when Harvey’s player makes her next set of 
experience rolls, she has to reduce that limit by 1 to 
5. Now if Harvey meets a deep one and fails his SAN 
roll, he will lose 1 point of SAN.
Harvey encounters 3 deep ones and Father Dagon all 
at once, and is required make one SAN roll. Harvey’s 
player fails the SAN roll and must roll for Sanity 
point loss once for each monster. She rolls 1D6 once 
for each deep one, results in 2, 4 and 5. She also rolls 
1D10 for Dagon, resulting in 4. Harvey loses Sanity 
points equal to the highest value—5 points.