
===== PDF page index 181 (rulebook p.181) =====

===== PDF page index 182 (rulebook p.182) =====

===== PDF page index 183 (rulebook p.183) =====
172 
Call of Cthulhu
he magic of the Cthulhu Mythos stems from 
the unfathomable alien intelligences that reside 
outside of humanity’s ability to comprehend. 
What may be the pinnacle of science can easily 
be interpreted as “magic” by the ignorant. What 
is certain is that those who delve into such matters rarely 
come away unchanged—usually for the worse! Manipulating 
time and space is not a thing to be done lightly and there can 
be grave consequences for those investigators who dabble in 
things best left alone.
Mythos magic is variable and was not tightly defined 
by H.P . Lovecraft; each occurrence of magic serves a 
particular story rather than fitting some consistent 
overarching structure. However, some generalizations can 
be made. Mythos magic is traditional in scope, centering on 
perilous summoning of horrible entities and the desperate 
manipulation of inimical forces. Spells are formally 
constructed; one wrong word or gesture can disrupt the spell 
at best, or cause it to go horribly wrong at worst.  
Few Mythos spells can be performed quickly, with many 
requiring exacting conditions as well as lengthy rites and 
ceremonies. Each spell must be studied and learned, often 
requiring the investigator to spend long hours poring over 
cryptic manuscripts and ancient books of lore. Though rare 
for investigators, cultists and sorcerers may be taught spells 
by their fellows, or even granted magical visions, knowledge, 
and spells through abhorrent communion with the dark 
gods of the Cthulhu Mythos. Investigators wishing to find a 
fast track for learning spells are more likely to find a one-way 
ticket to an asylum, their minds broken and sanity destroyed. 
Spells must be approached warily, since often their costs 
and effects are initially unknown to the spell-caster. For 
investigators, Mythos magic can be a dangerous trap, for in 
using it investigators lose Sanity points and gain Cthulhu 
Mythos knowledge—becoming more like those whom they 
seek to defeat. Mythos magic bewilders, shocks, disorients, 
and debilitates its human practitioners. Mankind was not 
meant to know such things, and with enough exposure the 
psychic and physical contradictions involved in using magic 
drive humans insane.
Investigators will mostly experience magic from outside 
sources, either by being the target or by witnessing the effect 
of spells cast by someone else. An investigator rarely becomes 
a mage, since the requisite knowledge and experience usually 
leads to madness first.
Whether investigators gain much by knowing the 
magic of the Cthulhu Mythos, they often risk much when 
attempting to use it. Spells learned while playing published 
scenarios may prove useful only in the course of a single 
adventure. Consequently, though all players are invited to 
study this chapter, it is only Keepers who will benefit most 
from it when planning adventures and creating suitably 
objectionable adversaries.
In This Chapter
This chapter discusses spells and the books of the Cthulhu 
Mythos—how spells are learned and how they are cast, as 
well as looking at the dark knowledge contained within 
ancient tomes. It also discusses the occult versus the magical, 
and tells ways to increase the POW characteristic.
This chapter does not contain spells. Mythos spells can 
be found in Chapter 12: Grimoire. 
What is Magic?
Gilman had some terrible hints from the dreaded 
Necronomicon of Abdul Al-hazred…and the suppressed 
Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt to correlate with his 
abstract formulae on the properties of space and the linkage 
of dimensions known and unknown.
 —H.P . Lovecraft, The Dreams in the Witch House
After World War I, astronomers confirmed that the thirty 
or forty thousand light years of easily observed stars nearest 
to us comprised only a minor corner of the universe. There 
was not one Milky Way, as astronomers had once believed, 
but rather thousands and millions of galaxies, most so 
faint and so distant that the truth of the nebulae had long 
been argued, but never before solved. The notion of island 
universes—galaxies, as we now say—was a bombshell. In the 
1920s, humanity’s perception of the unbounded universe’s 
true size increased by orders of magnitude.
Writing as such discoveries took place, Lovecraft gradually 
evolved a background myth incorporating such discoveries 
and added some flavorings from Einstein and Planck. These 
new “universes, ” so he appears to have speculated, were 
truly islands—their separation included their natural laws. 
Isolated by hundreds of thousands or millions of light years, 
the stuff of life could differ wildly. Very quickly, these islands 
also took on a Riemannian association of existing in or being 
connected to other dimensions.
The magic of the Cthulhu Mythos is the unifying logic 
of this universe of universes. Magic works everywhere. 
It models and defines the greater reality; it is the ultimate 
expression of natural law, the will of the Outer Gods made 
palpable and the arbiter of time, space, and matter.
In comparison, earthly science and religion seem of 
little avail. Apparently we understand far less than we flatter 
ourselves as knowing. Is imperfection in what we believe or 
in how we have come to believe it? Perhaps there is a poverty 
in our souls or our mathematical equations that forestalls 
ultimate knowledge and revelation. The Mythos mocks 
human pretensions.

===== PDF page index 184 (rulebook p.184) =====
173 
chapter 9: magic
Mythos Tomes
The open book lay flat between us, with the picture staring 
repulsively upward. As the old man whispered the words 
"more the same" a tiny splattering impact was heard, and 
something showed on the yellowed paper of the upturned 
volume. I thought of the rain and of a leaky roof, but rain is 
not red.
—H.P . Lovecraft, The Picture In The House
In Lovecraft’s stories, the protagonist usually learns Mythos 
magic by finding and following written instructions. The 
volumes of arcane lore mentioned by the Lovecraft Circle 
of writers represent the intellectual invasion of the Cthulhu 
Mythos. In particular, these ancient manuscripts and 
suppressed publications included recipes for the admission 
(or return!) of the Great Old Ones and the Outer Gods, 
as described in vivid detail in Lovecraft’s classic story The 
Dunwich Horror. At least by implication, such writings also 
indicated how to force away or dispel those dreadful entities. 
It takes time to learn, even from textbooks that have been 
carefully written and specially laid out just for that purpose. 
Studying the crabbed, idiosyncratic, and infinitely more 
difficult Mythos books takes much more time and dedication. 
These musty, thick books are often clumsily scribed by men 
whose sanity has long since been erased by the horror of 
their experiments, trials, and conjectures. The present day 
apparatus of scholarship does not exist in such books. There 
are no indices, no glossaries, no tables of contents, and 
no careful definitions. There may not be numbered pages, 
chapters, paragraphs, punctuation, or even breaks between 
words. Some tomes might best be described as the ravings of 
mad men—yet to the seeker of dark knowledge, such texts 
hold wondrous insights and power.
Many manuscripts are not even in a known alphabet—
some are older than time, in languages long lost; others 
are written in occult ciphers to stymie witch-finders or the 
Inquisition, and now must be cracked before the would-be 
reader can ponder the sinister truths they conceal.
Even if a sorcerer wrote for others who were familiar with 
the arcane and occult, the writing was for adepts and cultists, 
not laypersons. Strange terms and ideas would be written 
with no explanation. Valuable annotations might be made by 
a succession of owners, each perhaps in a different language or 
with a different aim, and some inscribed in error.
Many Mythos tomes are ancient and must be handled 
with care. Some are delicate and liable to crumble to dust if 
the reader doesn’t wear thin gloves and turn the pages with 
padded forceps. Some whisper that certain tomes are more 
than merely pages bound in leather; that they are "living" 
things, intent on sowing their evil taint on the unwary and 
acting as direct conduits to the horrors of the Outer Gods. 
Only in the present does the technology exist with which 
to make quick and accurate copies.
Reading Mythos Books
Opening a Mythos tome is a dangerous business. It was 
written by someone who had experienced the Mythos and, 
if the reader is successful in understanding what is written, 
this book will act as a conduit to the alien horrors of the 
Cthulhu Mythos. Opening the cover of a tome might be 
likened to opening a door to a burning room. By opening 
this door the reader is exposed to the fire and may be 
scorched or incinerated. The human mind is metaphorically 
burnt by the knowledge of the Mythos, the very act of trying 
to comprehend the material causing the reader to suffer both 
mentally and physically. Some of the lesser tomes might only 
be a small fire, but others, such as the dread Necronomicon, 
are a raging inferno.
When an investigator gains access to a Mythos tome, the 
Keeper should describe the cover and look of the book. The 
reader can swiftly ascertain whether the tome is written in a 
language he or she understands. Refer to Language (other) 
skill (page 66) for rules on recognizing and reading other 
languages. A translator must be found if a book is written 
in a language unknown by the investigator. The Keeper 
should decide what gets translated, how quickly, and how 
accurately. If the language is unknown or long forgotten, the 
investigators must come up with a plan that convinces the 
Keeper, or else the book baffles them.
Initial Reading
The next step, beyond looking at the cover, reading the title 
(if it has one that can be read), and determining the language 
in which the book is written, is to make an initial reading. 
To continue the analogy used above, this is where the 
An aspiring occult student attempts to cast a spell.
===== PDF page index 185 (rulebook p.185) =====
174 
Call of Cthulhu
investigator is exposed to the fire within. An initial reading 
can be swift and may represent the reader only having 
skimmed the book sufficient to gain some insight regarding 
its contents, or it may be a cover-to-cover reading. An initial 
reading can take as much time as the Keeper wishes; this 
may be minutes, hours, days, or weeks, depending on how 
the Keeper wants to shape the story. 
Whether a reading roll is called for is up to the Keeper, 
who may choose to grant automatic success to anyone with a 
modicum of skill in the appropriate language. 
To make a reading roll, the player makes an appropriate 
Language skill roll on 1D100. The Keeper decides on a 
difficulty level for reading the book based upon its age, form, 
and condition Table XI: Mythos Tomes, pages (237-239).
A book printed within the last century and in good 
condition would be of Regular difficulty.
A handwritten work is likely to be of a Hard difficulty 
level, especially if it is old.
The most challenging of ancient, moldering tomes, 
containing a mix of print and handwritten annotation, 
would be Extreme difficulty level.
If the investigator fails the reading roll, they perhaps get 
some inkling as to the content of the book, but have failed 
to comprehend it; no Sanity points are lost and no Cthulhu 
Mythos skill is gained. The player may ask to push the 
roll, but must justify doing so, perhaps staying up all night 
reading or using reference books as an aid to study. When 
thinking of consequences for failing a pushed reading roll, 
the Keeper should be creative and include Sanity point loss. 
If in no hurry, they may continue to read the book without 
pushing the roll. The timing of the next reading roll is at the 
Keeper’s discretion (perhaps once per week).
The Table XI: Mythos Tomes (pages 237-239) indicates 
the Cthulhu Mythos skill points and Sanity point loss for 
each tome. Each tome has two values for Cthulhu Mythos: 
CMI (Cthulhu Mythos Initial) showing how many Cthulhu 
Mythos skill points are given for an initial reading, and CMF 
(Cthulhu Mythos Full) that shows how many points are 
given for full study of the tome. 
Once the investigator has made an initial reading, the 
Keeper should reward them with the initial reading (CMI) 
number. The reader now automatically loses the Sanity cost 
of the tome (no Sanity roll is made)—non-believers do not 
take this Sanity loss (see Becoming a Believer, page 179).
As well as gaining Cthulhu Mythos skill and losing Sanity 
points, the initial reading also allows the reader to learn about 
the contents of book and gain some idea of what spells it might 
contain. The reader will also have a clear idea of how long it 
will take to complete a full study of the book (see following).
Full Study
He had himself read many of them—a Latin version of 
the abhorred Necronomicon, the sinister Liber Ivonis, 
the infamous Cultes des Goules of Comte d'Erlette, the 
Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt, and old Ludvig 
Prinn's hellish De Vermis Mysteriis. But there were others he 
had known merely by reputation or not at all—the Pnakotic 
Manuscripts, the Book of Dzyan, and a crumbling volume of 
wholly unidentifiable characters yet with certain symbols and 
diagrams shudderingly recognizable to the occult student.
—H.P . Lovecraft, The Haunter of the Dark
A full study of a Mythos tome indicates a comprehensive 
reading, as one might make when studying an academic 
work, or as a religious adherent might make of a sacred text. 
This may involve repeated readings, comparative reading, 
use of reference works, note taking, and so on. No reading 
roll is required; if any reading roll was required, it will have 
been made during the initial reading. 
Such a study can take many months. At the end of such 
a course of study, the reader must make a roll for Sanity 
point loss appropriate for the tome (if a Believer, see page 
179). The tome’s Mythos rating is then compared with the 
reader’s Cthulhu Mythos knowledge. If the reader’s Cthulhu 
Mythos skill is below the Mythos rating of the book, they 
gain Cthulhu Mythos points equal to the full study (CMF) 
number. If the reader’s Cthulhu Mythos skill is equal to or 
above the book’s Mythos rating, they only receive Cthulhu 
Harvey gets his hands on the Book of Eibon…
Book of Eibon : Sanity point loss 2D4. Cthulhu 
Mythos +3%/+8%, Full study 32 weeks. Mythos 
rating 33%.
The Keeper judges Harvey’s reading of the book to 
be secondary to the plot and is in no rush for Harvey to 
complete an initial reading, making it clear to the player 
that an initial reading is going to take a few days. 
Harvey begins reading the book in his home 
and then continues while on a long train journey. 
The Keeper decides that Harvey has read for long 
enough to get something from the book and that 
the train journey would be a dramatic point to 
call for a reading roll. As the book is a flawed and 
incomplete translation, the reading roll is set to Hard 
difficulty level. Harvey’s player makes the roll and is 
rewarded with +3% Cthulhu Mythos knowledge (the 
Cthulhu Mythos Initial—CMI number for the tome) 
and reduces Harvey’s maximum Sanity points by a 
corresponding amount. The player is also informed 
of a number of spells contained within the book. She 
then rolls 2D4 and Harvey loses 6 Sanity points. 
This is more that the five points required to trigger 
temporary insanity, should Harvey’s player pass an 
Intelligence roll, which she does. The Keeper decides 
that Harvey loses his mind and pulls the emergency 
stop cable, bails out of the train, and runs off into the 
night. The Keeper withholds that information and 
simply tells the player that Harvey awakens at dawn 
in a cornfield, his clothes muddy and torn. The Book 
of Eibon lies in tatters next to him, its pages scattered 
across the field. Harvey gains “Siderodromophobia—
Fear of trains, railroads, and train travel”. 
===== PDF page index 186 (rulebook p.186) =====
175 
chapter 9: magic
Mythos skill points equal to the initial reading (CMI) number 
of the book. 
Subsequent periods of full study may be undertaken, the 
difference being that each study will take twice as long as 
the previous one (double all reading times). Cthulhu Mythos 
skill increase and Sanity point loss are applied in the same 
way. In this way a single volume may be studied repeatedly 
over the years, but each time taking progressively longer 
than the last, and ultimately with diminishing returns.
In the summaries of Mythos books (see Chapter 11: 
Tomes of Eldritch Lore), reading times for books are given 
in weeks. The Keeper should never feel at the mercy of such 
numbers and should shrink or increase them as appropriate. 
An outstanding academic with pertinent language skills 
will read a book faster than an earnest-but-uneducated 
journalist. Time of study need not be consecutive days, 
weeks, or months. Note that for a subsequent study of a book, 
it is recommended that the full reading time is doubled and 
never reduced.
Only one tome may be studied at a time.
Mythos Rating—Books as References
Once a full study of a tome has been completed, the 
percentiles entered for its Cthulhu Mythos Rating also 
quantify its usefulness as a Mythos reference. Such a book 
may be able to provide a specific fact about the Mythos (such 
as how long a chthonian takes to reach maturity, or where 
Y’golonac’s body awaits its resurrection) that might be useful 
to the investigator’s current situation or line of research.
To research a specific piece of information, the 
investigator spends 1D4 game hours poring through the 
book. The player then rolls 1D100; if the result is equal to or 
less than the book’s Cthulhu Mythos Rating, the investigator 
finds the fact or an allusion to the fact (the Keeper can express 
the information as clearly or obscurely as desired). If the roll 
is failed, either the book does not hold the information or 
the reader failed to locate it. The user of the book will want 
to note what was or was not contained.
Increase of Other Skills
Conducting a full study of a tome may grant an increase 
in other skills as well as Cthulhu Mythos. After a full study 
of a tome, the reader automatically gains a skill tick for the 
language in which the book is written, and so their skill in 
that language may improve in the usual way during the next 
investigator development phase (see page 94). The Keeper 
should also determine whether a particular tome will 
provide additional benefits to the reader. Increases should 
be either limited to +1D6 to +1D10 skill points per skill, or 
simply awarded as a skill tick to be rolled during the next 
investigator development phase. Other skills that may be 
improved as a result of reading Mythos tomes include (but 
are not limited to) History, Archaeology, Anthropology, 
Occult, Astronomy, and other sciences like Chemistry, 
Biology, and Physics. 
Occult Books
The ideas for handling the information in Mythos books can 
also apply to non-Mythos books as well. An occult book by 
definition grants points to the Occult skill after being read. 
An occult book does not contain knowledge increasing the 
Cthulhu Mythos skill—otherwise it would be classified as a 
Mythos book. Some occult books may well include 
discussions of non-Mythos magic (see Non-Mythos Magic, 
page 180), including instructions for spells. An occult book 
may cost Sanity points if its contents warrant it.
 After an hour of careful searching, Harvey collects 
and collates the Book of Eibon  from the cornfield. 
Later he decides to undertake a full study of the Book 
of Eibon, knowing that it will take around 32 weeks 
to complete. At the end of this period Harvey’s player 
notes that Harvey’s Cthulhu Mythos knowledge is 
still well below the book’s Mythos rating of 33%, so 
he gains the +8% Cthulhu Mythos skill points for a 
full study (CMF). Harvey’s player has already made 
a reading roll when Harvey made his initial reading, 
so she does not need to roll again. However, she must 
make another roll for Sanity point loss (2D4), this 
time only losing 3 points. 
Harvey can begin a further study of the Book 
of Eibon  if he so wishes, but it will take twice as 
long (64 weeks), at the end of which he would lose 
another 2D4 Sanity points and gain the full study’s 
worth of +8% points of Cthulhu Mythos skill (so long 
as his Cthulhu Mythos skill remains below the tome’s 
Mythos rating). A third full study would take Harvey 
128 weeks (almost two and a half years).

===== PDF page index 187 (rulebook p.187) =====
176 
Call of Cthulhu
Using Magic
Wisely did Ibn Schacabao say, that happy is the tomb where 
no wizard hath lain, and happy the town at night whose 
wizards are all ashes.
—H. P . Lovecraft, The Festival
Increasing the Cthulhu Mythos skill widens the horizons 
of the student but chips away at mental reserves (reducing 
maximum Sanity points). However, learning about the Mythos 
may also let the scholar change reality in specific ways. These 
“packets of information” are organized as spells. They require 
activation, measured in the game by Magic points.
Magic Points (MP)
Magic points must (in most cases) be expended to cast spells, 
as well as to energize artifacts, power magical gates, and 
so on. An investigator begins the game with Magic points 
equal to one-fifth of his or her POW; however, cultists and 
powerful sorcerers often have larger pools of points from 
which to draw. 
Once an individual is out of Magic points, any further 
expenditure is deducted directly from hit points. Any such loss 
of hit points will manifest as physical damage in a form chosen 
by the Keeper—perhaps sores and cuts opening on the body, 
skin blistering, or blood running from the eyes or ears.
Spending or sacrificing Magic points or points of 
POW takes only the will of the owner. Doing so may leave 
sensations of pleasure mingled with regret, a numbness of 
the soul, or may not be noticeable at all. The spell caster’s 
essence or energy is channeled into powering the spell.
Some magical attacks leech Magic points or POW from 
unwilling targets. In those cases, loss may be characterized 
as being painful or as leaving a headache, or other minor 
symptoms. Involuntary loss of 10 POW would be a stronger 
sensation than that of losing the same amount of Magic points.
If Magic points reach zero, the investigator deducts 
further Magic point loss from hit points (one for one).
Regeneration of Magic points is a natural function, 
returning at one Magic point per hour (two Magic points per 
hour for those with POW over 100, three Magic points per 
hour if POW is over 200 and so on). The number of Magic 
points cannot regenerate to a value above one-fifth of the 
character’s POW . 
Magic points lost as hit points are healed according to 
the rules for Wounds and Healing  (page 119) . Healing 
of hit points and regeneration of Magic points can occur 
concurrently.
Were a character to obtain Magic points of a quantity 
greater than one-fifth of his or her POW , these could be 
spent, but the excess could not be regenerated.
Learning a Spell
A selection of spells for the game is presented alphabetically 
in Chapter 12: Grimoire.
Learning a Mythos spell does not cost Sanity points; 
however, casting a Mythos spell does.
Any individual can learn a spell. Studying the Mythos is 
the last thing a person should do, since increasing Mythos 
knowledge always brings the character closer and closer 
to the time when insanity or the Mythos stakes its claim. 
Sometimes circumstances demand such sacrifice.
Knowledge of a spell can be transferred in three ways, listed 
below. Learning from a book is by far the most common method.
Learning a Spell from a Mythos Book
Following an investigator conducting an initial reading of a 
book, the Keeper will indicate the presence and summarize 
each of the spells in a sentence or two, assuming the book 
contains spells. The Keeper should not use the rulebook 
name of a spell, but might instead offer a description like 
“broughte forth a Great Winged Beast from ye void which 
did sore crowde my place of busyness, ” in place of the too 
accurate and too bland Summon Byakhee. Likewise, a spell 
called “the unremitting terror, ” sounds a lot more credible 
than Implant Fear. Suggestions for alternative names for 
spells are listed in Chapter 12: The Grimoire.
To learn a spell from a Mythos book requires that the 
investigator has at least made an initial reading of the book. 
The investigator chooses the spell to study. Learning a spell 
can take hours, days, weeks, or months (typically 2D6 weeks, 
but at the Keeper’s discretion). Just as with reading a Mythos 
book, learning a Mythos spell may be taken up, put aside, 
and taken up again, as convenient. Usually a roll is called 
for at this stage; however, the Keeper may choose to grant 
automatic success, depending on the scenario.
If success is not automatic, the player should attempt a 
Hard INT roll to learn the spell. If the player fails the roll, 
the investigator has not learned the spell. The player may ask 
to push the roll, but must justify doing so; for example, the 
investigator might lock themselves away in isolation until the 
spell is mastered. When thinking of consequences for failing 
a pushed roll, the Keeper should be creative and include 
Sanity point loss and strange magical effects—both upon 
the investigator and their surroundings. If investigator is in 
no hurry, they may continue to work on learning the spell 
without pushing the roll. The timing of the next INT roll is at 
the Keeper’s discretion (perhaps once per two weeks).
Learning a Spell from Another Person
Having learned a spell, a character may teach it to others. 
One-on-one teaching is quicker than one person learning 
from a book and, typically, a spell can be learned in one week 
or less (1D8 days). Use the same rules as for learning a spell 
from a book, bearing in mind that the process will be faster.

===== PDF page index 188 (rulebook p.188) =====
177 
chapter 9: magic
Learning a Spell from a Mythos Entity
At will, any intelligent Mythos entity might supply a book or 
a scroll detailing a spell. More characteristically, the entity 
imparts such knowledge by means of dreams or visions; 
each episode is disturbing and alienating, gnawing away at 
the character’s sanity and will. This may happen quickly or 
slowly, as the story requires. A Mythos entity may imbue a 
complete spell in a character’s mind by telepathy, though 
such a powerful experience also might send the character 
directly to the asylum—the Keeper should consider the level 
of Sanity loss (a minimum of 1D6 is suggested).
Once the process is complete, the Keeper may require 
the target to make a successful INT roll to retain knowledge 
of the spell. If this fails, the process must be started anew.
Investigators rarely receive information in this manner; 
however, cultists often do.
Casting Spells
We have no business calling in such things from outside, and 
only very wicked people and very wicked cults ever try to.
—H. P . Lovecraft, The Dunwich Horror
Manipulating the forces of the Cthulhu Mythos leads to a 
loss of Sanity points in amounts that vary by spell. If some 
awful creature arrives in response to a spell, encountering it 
costs yet more Sanity points. Having no Sanity points does 
not prohibit spells from being cast—if it did, there would be 
no cultists.
Nearly all spells and many magical artifacts also require 
Magic points (or POW , if that is the need), to be expended, 
otherwise the spell does not activate and nothing happens.
Physical components may be necessary for particular 
spells. Such components may be reusable; for example, the 
great menhirs necessary for summoning He Who Is Not to Be 
Named (Call Hastur, see page 248). Other components may be 
consumed during the spell, such as the drinking of space-mead.
The time required to cast a spell is variable—it may be 
instantaneous, a few seconds, a game minute, a game week, 
or longer.
The caster must know the spell and recite a sometimes 
complex and lengthy chant or rite in authoritative tones. 
Usually the caster must have complete freedom of movement, 
since gesture can be as important as chant.
A casting roll is required when a character attempts to 
cast a newly learned spell for the first time. Once a spell has 
Reading and translating Mythos tomes often takes months, even years.
===== PDF page index 189 (rulebook p.189) =====
178 
Call of Cthulhu
been successfully cast (even if a pushed roll was required to do 
so), subsequent uses do not require a casting roll; non-player 
characters and monsters do not need to make casting rolls.
A Hard POW roll is required to successfully cast a spell 
the first time. If the casting roll is successful, refer to the 
spell description for the outcome. If the casting roll is failed, 
nothing happens.
Following a failed casting roll, the character has a choice 
whether to make a second attempt to cast the spell (paying 
the costs a second time)—either immediately or at any time 
in the future—and, in doing so, push the casting roll. 
If the pushed casting roll is successful, the spell works 
normally without negative consequences. If the pushed 
casting roll is failed, the spell still works normally, but dire 
consequences ensue for the caster. Ultimately a spell can 
always be cast—the casting roll gauges the harm the caster 
suffers in the process rather than success or failure of the spell.
The only alternative to this (other than giving up on the 
spell) is to go back to the source and learn the spell again 
from scratch—usually requiring another 2D6 weeks and 
a Hard INT roll. After relearning the spell, another initial 
casting roll may be made—this is a much more cautious 
approach than pushing the casting roll. This is one of the 
reasons why wizards seek to extend their lives—miscasting 
the greater spells can be a fast route to the grave!
Failing a Pushed 
Casting Roll
The caster must pay the cost of the spell (Magic points, Sanity 
points, and/or POW) multiplied by 1D6. Any overspend of 
Magic points is deducted from hit points—this can cause 
major wounds or death when pushing powerful spells. 
The Keeper should add one or more of the following side 
effects for less powerful spells (choose or roll 1D8). Note that 
both the caster and others nearby can be affected.
1: Blurred vision or temporary blindness.
2: Disembodied screaming, voices, or other noises.
3: Strong winds or other atmospheric effects.
4: Bleeding—from the caster, others present, or the 
environment (e.g. the walls).
5: Strange visions and hallucinations.
6: Small animals in the vicinity explode.
7: Foul smell of brimstone.
8: Mythos monster is accidentally summoned.
For more powerful spells (those that summon gods or 
cost POW for example), the side effects can be worse:
1: Earth shaking, walls rent asunder.
2: Epic thunder and lightning.
3: Blood falls from the sky.
4: The caster’s hand is withered and burnt.
5: The caster ages unnaturally (+2D10 years and apply 
characteristic modifiers, see Age, page 32).
6: Powerful or numerous Mythos entities appear, at -
tacking all those nearby, starting with the caster!
7: The caster or everyone nearby are sucked to a distant 
time or place.
8: Mythos deity is accidentally called.
When hit points are lost as a result of overspending 
Magic points, the Keeper should narrate the physical harm 
as a part of the physical consequence of the casting. 
Evidence of Spells Being Cast
The damage done by a spell is probably obvious. A visible 
manifestation of a spell being cast may not be so apparent. If it 
is, one might spot a peculiar hand gesture or body movement, 
or notice some unusual item or necessary ingredient. In 
themselves, such effects will begin to establish a tone for 
Mythos magic, so Keepers are cautioned to keep such effects 
Matthew’s initial attempt to cast the “Contact Ghoul” 
spell has failed, and he has decided to push the roll 
to try again. Unfortunately, the pushed roll fails too. 
Matthew has 13 Magic points and 13 hit points.
The cost of the spell is 1D3 Sanity points and 
5 Magic points—reduced to 4 Magic points by the 
Keeper because it is being cast in a moonlit graveyard. 
Matthew has already paid the cost twice: once for the 
first attempt and once for the pushed roll immediately 
after (leaving him 5 Magic points). Now he must pay 
more. A 4 is rolled on the 1D6 multiplier, so Matthew 
must pay 16 Magic points (4 MP × 4 = 16) and 9 Sanity 
points (4D3), as the Mythos power burns through him. 
The Keeper describes a sound like thunder as a 
nearby gravestone explodes, showering Matthew 
in shards of stone (linking events in the story to the 
physical damage inflicted by the rules). Matthew 
must spend 16 Magic points. He has 5 Magic Points 
left; these are spent and he still owes 11, which must 
come from his hit points. Luckily, Matthew has 13 hit 
points and was previously uninjured. The damage 
reduces Matthew to 2 hit points. Matthew lost over 
half his hit points in one blow (a major wound) and 
must make a CON roll to remain conscious. When 
he recovers, the Sanity point loss will have resulted in 
insanity. The Keeper amends two of his background 
entries, one for the wound and one for the insanity.
As the dust settles, Matthew’s friend may notice 
the pale humanoid figure crouching behind the 
remnants of the sundered gravestone. The spell 
worked (as it must when the casting roll is pushed)—
time for a Sanity roll!
===== PDF page index 190 (rulebook p.190) =====
179 
chapter 9: magic
low-key. However, the effects could be wide-ranging, from 
hideous roars from beyond, gouts of fire, lines of electrical force, 
pale nimbuses and auroras of various colors, to the rushing of 
winds, raised hackles, ionized air, prickly sensations, the stench 
of sulfur, howling and hissing animals, murmuring voices, 
alarming moans, or whatever the Keeper thinks fitting.
Disrupted Spell Casting
The casting of a spell will be disrupted if the caster is 
significantly distracted (physically struck or shot, for 
example) during its casting.. The Keeper may consult the 
charts for the consequences of failing a pushed casting roll 
(see previous page) for inspiration on what might happen. 
The caster of a failed spell casting must still pay the Sanity 
point and Magic point costs.
Becoming a Believer
Leng, wherever in space or time it might brood, was not 
a region I would care to be in or near, nor did I relish the 
proximity of a world that had ever bred such ambiguous and 
Archaean monstrosities as those Lake had just mentioned. 
At the moment I felt sorry that I had ever read the abhorred 
Necronomicon, or talked so much with that unpleasantly 
erudite folklorist Wilmarth at the university.
—H.P . Lovecraft, At the Mountains of Madness
An investigator who comes face-to-face with a deep one or a 
ghoul has an experience that leaves no option but to believe in 
the cosmic horror of the Cthulhu Mythos. However, reading 
the Cultes des Goules while safe in an apartment with the lights 
on, the reader might dismiss the contents as a work of fantasy. 
This is the player’s prerogative, but disbelief has it perils.
 Whether one believes what is read or not, the knowledge 
is still absorbed. If the character chooses not to believe what 
is read then the Cthulhu Mythos knowledge granted by 
the book is added to the investigator’s skill and maximum 
Sanity points are reduced by the corresponding amount, 
but no Sanity points are lost. In this way an investigator 
can accumulate considerable knowledge of the Cthulhu 
Mythos without losing any Sanity points at all. However, 
when encountering evidence of the Mythos firsthand, the 
investigator will realize that those accursed books held the 
truth! At that point the investigator becomes a believer and 
immediately loses Sanity points equal to his or her present 
Cthulhu Mythos score. 
Keepers may be relieved that this requires little bookkeeping 
on their part. The player records their investigator’s gain of 
Cthulhu Mythos skill as normal and it is that value that is 
deducted from their Sanity points when becoming a believer. 
An investigator can choose to remain a nonbeliever until 
forced to lose Sanity points for encountering the Mythos 
firsthand. Viewing human corpses or torture may cause Sanity 
point loss, but such loss does not lead to belief in the Mythos. 
A nonbeliever may read Mythos books and learn (but 
not cast) spells. Firsthand experience of the Mythos always 
calls for a Sanity roll, and the loss of one or more of Sanity 
points compel an investigator to believe in the Cthulhu 
Mythos thereafter. However, even some firsthand experiences 
may not convince a disbeliever; if a Sanity roll is passed for 
encountering a deep one (SAN 0/1D6) no Sanity points are 
lost and, as such, an investigator might remain a nonbeliever, 
perhaps rationalizing the creature as Earthly human mutation. 
However, meeting a clearly unearthly being or a manifestation 
of one of the gods of the Mythos will always be enough to rip 
through the façade of the investigator’s beliefs.
An investigator can become a believer at any point the 
player wishes (and take the Sanity point loss).
How Sorcerers Get That Way
Though investigators rarely have the chance, sorcerers and 
cultists sometimes swagger around with unseemly amounts 
of Power (POW). Where did it come from? 
When a character successfully casts a spell requiring an 
opposed POW roll to affect the target, this creates a chance 
for the caster’s POW to increase through this “exercise” . If 
the caster wins the opposed POW roll, a subsequent roll to 
increase his or her POW may be attempted. If the result of 
a 1D100 roll is greater than the caster’s POW (or the roll is 
96 or greater), the caster’s POW increases by 1D10 points 
permanently.
As a reward for any Luck roll result of 01, POW can be 
said to have been exercised. Roll the percentile dice and if 
the roll is greater than the character’s POW , or if the roll is 
96 or greater, the character’s POW increases by 1D10 points 
permanently.
The character may be able to arrange a gift of or a trade 
for POW from some Mythos deity. The rationale for this is 
"Shoot..was that a ph'ngui or a ph'nguy?"
===== PDF page index 191 (rulebook p.191) =====
180 
Call of Cthulhu
best left to the Keeper. Such an event is likely to increase 
Cthulhu Mythos as well, and would cost additional Sanity 
points besides those lost in communicating with the entity.
Increasing Power does not increase current Sanity points.
Non-Mythos Magic
Other earthly magic or religiosity can be significant and can 
have effects in the game if the Keeper wills it. Such earthly 
“magick” may be real or fraudulent; this is for the Keeper 
(perhaps in discussion with the player group) to determine.
Mechanics and procedures for such magic should be the 
same as those for Mythos magic, though the means and aims 
of earthly magic will greatly differ. If non-Mythos magic is 
accepted in your game, it is suggested that you tie it to the 
Occult skill. Horrific deeds should always cost Sanity points.
Optional Rules
Spontaneous Use of the  
Cthulhu Mythos Skill
Knowledge of the Cthulhu Mythos not only allows a character 
to learn and cast spells, it also allows someone to improvise 
magical effects akin to spells. This is resolved in the same way 
as any regular skill use. The player first states an aim; the Keeper 
then considers if the aim is acceptable, suggesting a lesser aim 
in preference to blocking the player’s proposal if possible. 
The default difficulty level for use of the Cthulhu Mythos 
skill in this way is Regular. Alternatively, if the character is using 
their Cthulhu Mythos skill to affect a target that is resisting 
Ernest has never encountered the Cthulhu Mythos, 
but found a copy of the Cultes des Goules among 
his late uncle’s possessions. Having finished an ini -
tial reading, the Keeper grants Ernest +4 points of 
Cthulhu Mythos skill and describes some of the book’s 
contents and the magical rituals it purports to docu-
ment. The Keeper then asks whether Ernest believes 
what he is reading. Ernest is a scientist and has no 
truck with this superstitious mumbo-jumbo, though 
he is intrigued by it. Ernest therefore loses no Sanity 
points as a result of his reading.
Weeks later, Ernest encounters a ghoul while 
delving around the family vault, and fails his Sanity 
roll. In addition to the Sanity point loss for seeing the 
ghoul (1D6), Ernest must also lose Sanity points equal 
to his present Cthulhu Mythos skill at the revelation 
that his accumulated knowledge of the Mythos is 
founded on truth! Ernest loses 6 Sanity points (4 for the 
Cthulhu Mythos skill points he gained when reading 
the tome plus 2 for encountering the ghoul). The loss 
is potentially insanity inducing—Ernest passes his 
Intelligence roll and goes temporarily insane.
them, treat this as an opposed roll between the caster’s Cthulhu 
Mythos skill and the target’s POW; no further POW-versus-
POW roll is required. In addition, the Keeper must decide on 
a cost in Magic points and Sanity points. The Keeper should 
gauge the cost and make it similar to a comparable spell. See the 
guidance in Chapter 10a: Playing the Game. 
The cost and consequence of pushing the Cthulhu 
Mythos skill roll and failing are the same as those for failing 
a pushed spell casting roll. The Keeper may allow the player’s 
aim to be achieved when a pushed roll is failed, however this 
is not guaranteed as it is for a spell.
Unlike casting a spell, using the Cthulhu Mythos skill to 
achieve a given effect must be rolled for every time.
Some illustrations of spontaneous Cthulhu Mythos skill use:
To cause physical harm to one target:  the caster chooses 
the number of Magic points expended, and loses half that 
number of Sanity points. To be effective, the caster needs to 
beat the target in an opposed Cthulhu Mythos versus POW 
roll. If the caster wins the roll, the target takes damage equal 
to the number of magic points expended. Nelson extends 
his hand and screams, “Die!” The veins on his arms bulge 
and turn black, and he focuses on the approaching beast. 
Nelson’s player spends 8 Magic points and 4 Sanity points, 
and then makes a Cthulhu Mythos skill roll, getting a Hard 
success (below half his skill). The Keeper makes a POW roll 
for the target, achieving a Regular success–Nelson wins. The 
Keeper describes the beast’s veins erupting in a mess of gore 
and deducts 8 hit points.
To banish a monster: the caster spends Magic points equal 
to one-fifth of the monster’s POW and 1D3 Sanity points. The 
caster must then succeed in an opposed Cthulhu Mythos ver-
sus POW roll against the monster. Enoch stands silently with 
eyes closed as the dark young of Shub-Niggurath stomps out of 
the tree line. Enoch has only 14 Magic points and must expend 
18 to attempt to banish the monstrosity. He does so; taking 4 
hit points of harm (the excess Magic point cost is paid in hit 
points). He whispers strange words to the beast, uncaring of the 
bloody tears that are flowing from his now open eyes. Enoch’s 
player makes a Cthulhu Mythos skill roll, getting a Regular suc-
cess. The Keeper makes a POW roll for dark young, achieving 
a Hard success–the dark young wins. The Keeper tells how the 
dark young strides towards Enoch, who lacks the Magic points 
to push the roll and so turns to flee.
To commune with the recently deceased:  costs the caster 
10 Magic points plus 1D10 Sanity points. The effects last a 
few rounds. Charlie dies just as the investigators get to him. 
“Tell us who killed you, ” they ask him, but it is too late. Plac-
ing her hands on Charlie’s chest, Violet implores Charlie to 
speak. Violet’s player spends 10 Magic points and 3 Sanity 
points, and then makes a successful Cthulhu Mythos skill 
roll. The Keeper explains, “Y ou hear Charlie’s words croak 
from Violet’s throat… ” The other players can now talk with 
Charlie for a few rounds. The Keeper decides enough has 
been said and says, “Blood begins to bubble up in Violet’s 
throat. Violet you’re back! But you feel cold, so cold!” 
===== PDF page index 192 (rulebook p.192) =====
181 
chapter 9: magic
Laurence (Daphne’s investigator) is sure that the ancient 
stone tablet he holds can yield valuable information, 
yet he lacks the arcane knowledge required to unlock its 
secrets. Daphne looks at the Keeper and asks, “What if I 
try to use my Mythos knowledge to find a way?”
Keeper: “OK, what are you doing?”
Daphne: “Holding the tablet and staring deeply 
into it, mumbling under my breath. ”
The Keeper considers that it would be cool if 
Laurence could unlock the knowledge in the tablet, as 
it would move the game on nicely.
Keeper: “OK, it’ll cost you 3 Magic points and 1 
Sanity point—give me a roll. ”
Laurence has 14 Cthulhu Mythos, Daphne rolls 
84—a failure. Nothing happens.
Daphne considers: “Bother! I go outside, under 
the moon and start yelling out the names of all the 
Mythos gods that I’ve read about and try to open my 
mind to the tablet. ”
The Keeper likes the sound of this and agrees to 
a pushed roll. Daphne crosses off another 3 Magic 
points and 1 Sanity point.
Daphne fails again, with a roll of 34. Laurence will 
have to suffer the consequences. She rolls 3 on 1D6 for 
the multiplier (see Failing a Pushed Casting Roll, page 
178), so Laurence must lose another 9 Magic points (3 
× 3) and another 3 Sanity points. Laurence has now 
spent 15 Magic points, which is more than he possesses, 
so he loses several hit points as well, leading the Keeper 
to include physical harm as part of the consequence 
of failing the pushed roll. Whether Daphne gains any 
insights is up to the Keeper.
The Keeper describes the consequence: “You are 
squeezing the tablet so hard that the skin on your 
hands begins to blister and split. Blood starts to seep 
out. It crawls across the tablet and begins to form 
letters. You stare intently at the letters as they form 
words. You can read the words, they say… ”
The Keeper decides to grant Daphne some insight 
into the knowledge held within the tablet, but at quite 
a cost to Laurence’s health and sanity.
