
===== PDF page index 193 (rulebook p.193) =====
182 
Call of Cthulhu

===== PDF page index 194 (rulebook p.194) =====

===== PDF page index 195 (rulebook p.195) =====
184 
Call of Cthulhu
eing the Keeper can be immensely rewarding; 
you get to make a lot of decisions about what 
happens during the game, present the mystery 
to the players, and portray numerous non-
player characters and monsters. Y ou will also 
be the final arbiter of how rules are applied, and this chapter 
contains advice and guidance intended to help you use those 
rules to best effect. 
Before reading this chapter make sure you have read 
chapters 4-9. 
New Keepers
When you act as Keeper you become the game moderator. 
Whether you are using a published scenario or creating one 
of your own, you alone know the story plot and the likely 
outcomes and solutions. Y our job is to present the mystery 
and story during play, incidentally playing the roles of 
monsters and sinister or ordinary people that the investigators 
meet. Y ou have the responsibility for preparing and running 
the scenario without bias. Above all else, you should listen to 
your players and react to what they say and do.
Having a good understanding of the game and the rules 
is essential in enabling you to answer player questions and to 
be able to present the material fairly. Y ou will find individual 
monster and spell descriptions in other chapters—you don’t 
need to memorize this information, just be familiar with it.
With the purchase of this book and some dice, you 
have everything needed to play Call of Cthulhu . It is 
recommended that you start with either The Haunting—in 
the Call of Cthulhu Quick-Start Rules , a free download at 
www.chaosium.com, or Amidst the Ancient Trees  (page 
346). These scenarios have been specifically presented for 
new Keepers, with advice dotted throughout the text. Pick 
one to play, read the scenario through, and then invite 
some friends over to play. Have them create investigators 
together—be sure to have the relevant sheets printed out or 
photocopied in advance.
Summarize the rules for your players. Don’t try to 
explain every rule in detail—just give them a brief overview 
and then address specific rules as they arise in play. Once 
everyone is ready, introduce the scenario and work your way 
through it.
Do not be concerned if 
you make some mistakes 
the first time around. 
When you have finished 
playing, read through 
the rules and this chapter 
again. After having run one 
game, the rules and advice 
will make a lot more sense. 
Y ou will continue to hone 
your “Keepering” skills over 
a number of games as you 
become more familiar with 
the game.
Y ou may wish to invent your own scenarios—that’s great, 
but it’s probably best to start with the ones in this book or 
consult one of the many Call of Cthulhu scenario supplements 
available. Published scenarios can be a great source of 
information about crafting a story into an adventure, as well 
as providing an insight into how the game can be played.  
Finding Players
Okay, so you’ve got the Call of Cthulhu rulebook and some 
roleplaying dice, and you’re ready to run a game—except 
you’ve got no players! What can you do?
Here are a few ideas to get you gaming:
Talk to your friends. Show them the rulebook and tell 
them about how cool the game sounds. Perhaps get them to 
read one of Lovecraft’s stories to see if they like it, preferably 
a short one like The Outsider . Y ou could also ask family 
members to try the game. Essentially, you only need a 
Keeper and one player, but if you can get two or three players 
together then that’s ideal. 
Ask in your local hobby store or put a notice up. Talk to 
the staff in the hobby store and ask if there is a game of Call 
of Cthulhu you can join—many stores have gaming rooms 
where people can get together to play. Perhaps a group is 
looking for a new player? Failing that, ask if you can put 
a notice up saying that you want to start a Call of Cthulhu 
game and need players.
Many schools, colleges, and universities have roleplaying 
societies and groups. If there’s not one where you are, 
perhaps you can start one. This can be a really good way to 
meet like-minded people.
Go to a local gaming convention. Gaming conventions 
come in all shapes and sizes, and they are held all around 
the world. Perhaps your local gaming store can point you 
in the right direction. Conventions provide the opportunity 
to meet new people, make friends, and play games. Even 
though you might not find anyone local to you, you’ll have 
the chance to play games and get some experience before 
starting your own group.
Experienced 
Keepers
The Call of Cthulhu roleplaying 
game has been around for over 30 
years, so many of you reading this 
will be old hands when it comes 
to running the game. You will have 
noticed that this edition presents 
some modifications to the rules 
and this chapter is intended to 
offer advice on how to integrate 
these changes into your game.
When meeting 
 prospective players 
for the first time, try 
to arrange to meet in 
a safe public place 
such as a cafe or 
bar. Don’t give out 
your phone number 
or address to anyone 
until you get to know 
them.

===== PDF page index 196 (rulebook p.196) =====
185 
chapter 10: playing the game
Look online at Cthulhu gaming sites. Look at www.yog-
sothoth.com and www.mu-podcast.com, where people from 
all around the world discuss Call of Cthulhu. 
Preparing to Play the Game
The purpose of roleplaying is to have a good time—that 
should not need saying, but as with any hobby, some people 
get so caught up in the moment that they lose sight of this 
most basic of requirements.
Some tips for creating atmosphere in your games:
Try to play in a room where there is no one but the 
gaming group; having your daughter running around the 
table or your brother watching football on TV in the same 
room is not going to help!
Set up the gaming area appropriately. Close the curtains 
and dim the lights a little (remember you still need to be 
able to read the scenario and the players need to be able to 
see their investigator sheets and the dice). Using low-light 
lamps, LED penlights, or candles can be very effective—but 
never leave lit candles unattended!
Turn cell/mobile phones to silent (or preferably turn 
them off) for the duration of the game. Likewise, put away 
the computers and tablets—everyone’s focus should be on 
the game. Being distracted by electronic devices is a surefire 
way to dispel any sense of atmosphere.
Suitable music playing low in the background can be 
great for establishing a mood. Avoid pop and rock songs as 
familiarity and the sudden changes in tempo and volume can 
work against you. Look for atmospheric classical music or 
soundscapes of electronic music. Published music especially 
written for horror roleplaying games can also be purchased. 
Period music (appropriate to the scenario) can also help, 
such as twenties jazz played at a low volume.
Setting the Tone
Consider what sort of game you want to run. Y ou can aim for 
high tension, over-the-top schlock horror, or a pulp-action romp. 
Having said that, the default mode for this game is intended to be 
horror with some action scenes thrown into the mix. 
Y ou should decide, as a group, whether the game is to be 
serious or jocular. Comedy and horror are good bedfellows 
and the switch from one to the other is used to great effect in 
many movies. However, too much comedy lessens the horror. 
The way that you act (as Keeper) reinforces or undermines 
the tone. As Keeper, you may find that the players take their 
lead from you, not only in what you say, but how you behave. 
Y ou may set the scene and build the pace and the tension, 
only to have a player make a joke remark and for everyone 
to fall about laughing, breaking the tension and ruining the 
atmosphere. Shared jokes and laughing are important, but as 
the game draws to a climax, so too should the horror. 
If you are seeking a more intense gaming experience, talk 
to your players about atmosphere and tell them at the start of 
a gaming session that tonight’s game will be more enjoyable 
for all if you can work together on building and maintaining 
a good atmosphere. Some groups use the first 30 minutes of 
a gaming session to share news, tell jokes, and relax—getting 
this all out of the way before the game begins. Try to draw a 
clear line between “social” time and “game” time.
This is a horror game and you can expect players to enjoy 
being scared; however, people have differing views of what is 
acceptable, and these limits should be discussed before play. 
Ask your players if there is anything that they definitely do not 
want to see in the game. The answers can be quite unexpected; 
one player may be fine with everything except violence to 
animals, for example. Establish the level of their objection 
and either avoid the topic entirely or use the dramatic effect of 
“fading to black” when it occurs in play.
Distasteful Historical Themes
Distasteful issues may arise during the game. Y ou may feel 
that your portrayal of fictional prejudice and bigotry is 
worthy of an Oscar; however, another player may find it 
offensive. The world was a very different place in the 1920s. 
Behaviors most of us would find repugnant today were 
ordinary and acceptable then. Racism, xenophobia, religious 
bias, and sexual discrimination were part of everyday life and 
often loudly espoused. Many laws systematically supported 
segregation and discrimination of every sort, and social 
forces of great power underwrote that legislation.
Scenario authors and Keepers can choose to ignore 
social history as not germane, or decide to incorporate 
specific elements into their plots. Both approaches can be 
found in published scenarios. Ultimately how you play it is 
up to you and your group, but if you are going to use themes 
of discrimination in the game, it is strongly recommended 
that you discuss the issue early on.
Investigators don't always sleep easy.
===== PDF page index 197 (rulebook p.197) =====
186 
Call of Cthulhu
Creating Investigators 
Creating an investigator is straightforward—just follow 
the rules in Chapter 3: Creating Investigators . There is 
plenty of supplementary information on period settings 
and professions that can help the players expand and flesh 
out their investigators. A good place for more information 
is in the numerous Call of Cthulhu source books published 
by Chaosium, especially the Investigator Handbook, as this 
includes a lot of extra information and options for players.
Advising the Players
Once you are familiar with your scenario it is time to brief 
the players so that they can create suitable investigators. For 
a standard scenario the players can be presented with an 
initial premise:
G The date and location of the scenario.
G A basic description of how the scenario begins.
G Suggested professions suitable to the scenario’s 
premise.
G Suggestions for how the investigators know each 
other.
The more information the players have to work with, the 
better they can create investigators who will be tied into the 
plot and possess motivation to follow the story path. 
There may be quite a lot you can say about the initial 
premise without giving away too much of what is to come. 
When discussing the initial premise, you might consider 
telling the players information that would be unknown to 
their investigators at the outset of play
Investigator Groups (I):                             
Integrated Investigators
Try to throw out as many “hooks” as possible in your 
initial premise. One way to involve a player is to place a 
family member or friend in jeopardy; for example, “Y our 
investigator’s brother has been murdered. ” That’s fine, 
but some players may not feel affected by the death of a 
fictional relative. However, if you volunteer the story-hook 
as a question to the players (“There’s been a murder—tell me 
who’s been killed"), a player may suggest the link (“Could 
the deceased be my brother?”). When the motivation is 
coming from the player, you can be sure it will hold a lot 
more emotional resonance for that particular player than 
something you impose.
You’re about to run Amidst the Ancient Trees, the first 
of the scenarios at the back of this book. You deliver 
the premise thus: “The story is set in Vermont, 1925. 
There’s been a kidnapping and a call is out for posses to 
head into the woods in search of the missing girl. You’ll 
probably want at least one outdoorsman or hunter 
among the group. Most likely you’ll all be concerned lo-
cals, but if you want to be from out of town, you could 
be. How you know each other, if you do, is up to you. ” 
Investigators can come from all manners of backgrounds
===== PDF page index 198 (rulebook p.198) =====
187 
chapter 10: playing the game
Some scenarios don’t require 
that the investigators know 
one another before the game 
starts. A game may begin with a 
disparate group of investigators 
compelled to action by some 
dramatic event. These adventures 
are often described as starting 
“in medias res”—in the middle 
of things. Think of these like 
a horror film in which random 
characters have to work          
together to survive; many zombie 
films work on such a premise. 
Some campaigns can begin this 
way too, with the investigators 
drawn together to combat 
the Mythos due to a shared            
experience that has changed 
their view of the world and their 
purpose in life.
This exchange works both ways. Just as the player should 
pick up on story-hooks that you provide, you should pick up 
on what the players say about their characters. The players 
are encouraged to come up with interesting backstories 
for their investigators, and you should listen to what the 
players say and try to weave it into your existing story. These 
story-hooks might be listed as investigator backstories or be 
implied by the choice of profession or skills. 
Weave the investigators and the plot together wherever 
possible. This may feel contrived at times, but good drama 
is often a contrivance. Consider the cast of non-player 
characters in the scenario. How many of them could be 
family members, friends, enemies, or associates that the 
players have mentioned in their investigator backstories? 
Y ou may have some detailed non-player characters prepared 
as part of the plot—consider if any of those non-player 
characters could be played as investigators. Don’t allow the 
non-player characters to outshine the investigators.
Ask the players questions about their investigators–—
their backstories, aspirations, friends, and rivals, and take 
note of any replies that might be incorporated or noted for 
use later. Alternatively, you might suggest amendments to be 
made to an investigator that will integrate them more closely 
to the plot. As stated earlier, this is a two-way process and 
everything is mutable at this stage. Get it right now and the 
game will flow more smoothly.
Many of the details in your scenario, such as place 
names and character names, can easily be changed without 
affecting the core of the scenario. Incorporating names and 
other details that the players come up with can make those 
elements of the scenario feel more real to the players, and 
produces a more collaborative story to which everyone has 
contributed.
Investigator Groups (II):                       
Random Investigators
Some scenarios, especially “one-shots, ” will work with a random 
mix of investigators. In this case, simply allow each player to 
create an investigator, then find a way of bringing them together 
and a reason for them to engage with the scenario. The benefit 
of this approach is that players get free rein to make their 
investigators however they wish. This can work well in a scenario 
that takes random people and throws them into a situation, but 
is not so good for a more open-ended investigative scenario or 
campaign where the players would struggle for a reason why 
their investigators would work together.
Nick says his investigator grew up in a rural area but 
has since moved in search of work. Someone suggests 
a travelling salesman and Nick likes the idea. The 
Keeper asks Nick to say a little more about where he 
grew up and what his village was called. Nick states 
that his investigator grew up in a small town called 
Tingewick. The Keeper immediately changes the 
name of the town in the scenario from Bennington 
to Tingewick. The Keeper asks a few more questions 
of the player. “Who do you remember? Any child -
hood friends, enemies, teachers, etc.?” The Keeper 
incorporates some of Nick’s responses into the plot. 
Rather than adding new characters, the Keeper sim-
ply changes some pre-existing non-player characters 
to fit those offered by the player. Nick mentions a girl 
his investigator was sweet on, and the Keeper im -
mediately latches onto this and has her be the kidnap 
victim (adjusting her age accordingly), asking the 
player for the girl’s name (again, changing this detail 
in the scenario to fit the player’s contribution). 
All the Keeper tells the players is that the scenario is 
set in the modern day and that they can create what-
ever investigators they wish. The players end up with 
a group consisting of a frail Archaeologist, a French 
dancer, an ex-KGB agent, and a middle-aged Ameri-
can housewife. The Keeper smiles and tells them they 
are all on a transatlantic flight as the game begins. 
At this stage the investigators don’t even know each 
other, but the isolation of being 27,000 feet up in the 
air throws them together for the scenario. Fun will 
no doubt be had through the clash of personalities. If 
they survive the scenario, it would seem unlikely that 
they would ever have cause to meet again, let alone 
team up to carry out future investigations.

===== PDF page index 199 (rulebook p.199) =====
188 
Call of Cthulhu
Investigator Groups (III):  
Pre-Generated Investigators
Y ou can create the investigators before play and then 
distribute them among the players. This approach works 
well for games where play is restricted to a set time slot, such 
as at a gaming convention.
 Try to remember the following factors when designing 
investigators for other people:
Archetypes are quickly accessible:  The grizzled ex-cop, 
curious reporter, etc. 
Balance: Try to balance the group so that each player will 
get a turn in the spotlight. Consider the requirements of the 
scenario in terms of skills and plot-hooks, and share these 
with the investigators. Avoid basing the scenario around one 
investigator, as this may leave the other players feeling they 
are playing mere cameo roles. Presenting balanced investiga-
tors does not require that every investigator be equally good 
at all things. Just be sure that each investigator has strengths 
that will come into play; one investigator might be good with 
their fists, while another is strong academically. 
Backstory: Write a backstory for each investigator, but don’t 
write too much because some players may struggle to remem-
ber or make use of backstory information. If the scenario 
depends upon a particular investigator knowing certain infor-
mation, be sure to make it very clear to the player—don’t hide 
it in a large body of text. Be sure to allow players time to read 
and digest their backstories at the start of play, and consider 
using bullet points to summarize essential information.
Unallocated skill points: Consider leaving some skill points 
unallocated to allow each player to customize their own 
investigator.
Tell each investigator what he or she knows about the 
other investigators: Y ou may also want to provide a brief 
résumé for each investigator, listing what he or she knows 
about the other investigators, though this is not essential. If 
you do write one, it should be partial, being based on that 
particular investigator’s point of view—an individual’s per -
ception of a particular person can conflict with another’s, or 
be wholly mistaken.
Say what they know, not how they feel:  Rather than dic -
tating how an investigator feels in their backstory, tell the 
player the “facts” as their investigator perceives them, and 
let the player decide what is true and how they feel about it. 
Write reciprocal backstory information: If you write a 
statement for one investigator regarding another, be sure 
to write a reciprocal statement on the other investigator’s 
sheet. As already stated, different investigators may perceive 
different versions of the same truth. 
Approving the Investigators
Take a few minutes to look over the investigator sheets. 
Ensure the players have completed their investigators 
correctly (have skill points all been spent?) Then note down 
a few details about each investigator along with names, 
occupations, APP , Credit Rating, and any key aspects of 
their backstory that catch your attention. 
Key information can be summarized in a reference chart, 
using the format at the bottom of the page.
Avoid being unnecessarily harsh when reviewing 
investigators; remember that regardless of how skilled or 
well-armed an investigator may appear to be, the monsters 
of the Cthulhu Mythos will always be more powerful.
In place of, “You bear a grudge against Trevor who 
stole your girlfriend, ” simply write the facts as that 
investigator understands them, “Trevor stole the affec-
tions of your girlfriend”. It’s then up to the player to 
decide how his or her investigator feels about losing his 
girlfriend and what effect it has upon his relationship 
with Trevor.
If one investigator (Brian) is told, “Trevor stole the af-
fections of your girlfriend”, it is important that Trevor’s 
player also be told about this. This might take a slightly 
conflicting form: “You’re friends with Suzie. She used 
to go out with Brian until she got bored with him”.
Name Profession APP Credit 
Rating
Backstory Notes
Todd Rahman Private Eye 65 30 Buddhist.
Runs Rockwell Investigations in NYC.
Police issue handgun.
Pat Swift Ex-Athlete 75 20 Health-food fanatic.
Proud of his sporting trophies.
Worships the New Y ork Y ankees.
Todd Rahman saved his life and he now works for Todd.
Loves his elderly mother.
===== PDF page index 200 (rulebook p.200) =====
189 
chapter 10: playing the game
Creating New Occupations
If none of the published list of professions fit your 
requirements when creating investigators, or if you simply 
prefer, just choose any combination of eight skills that best 
fit the investigator’s occupation. Don’t forget to determine 
a range for Credit Rating. This is a quick and easy method, 
allowing for spontaneity and speed.
Linking Investigators  
When Playing Subsequent Scenarios
The advice offered above for tying characters to the scenario 
may work well enough for their first adventure, however this 
can become labored if overused. If you are running unrelated 
scenarios with the same investigators, a good reason is 
required for them to be repeatedly involved in foiling the 
plots of the Mythos. A deceased uncle is all very well for one 
plotline, but what about next time? Just how many murdered 
relatives can one investigator have?  
Many scenarios are conceived and written as an 
interesting story, with the investigators added on afterwards. 
Some form of motivation must be chosen as a reason for the 
investigators to connect with the plot. 
Common motivations include:
G Employment: The investigators are professionals 
available for hire.
G A social connection:  A friend or member of an 
investigator’s family, who is integral to the plot.
G Personal gain: A chance to find fame or fortune.
G Altruism: Saving others, perhaps even saving the 
world itself.
G Moral code:  Battling evil as a result of personal 
convictions.
The investigator’s background is there to help in this 
respect. The initial backstory written by the players serves 
to build their characters and define their connections to the 
world. The entries that you add or amend during play should 
provide connections between that character and the Mythos, 
especially those that are the result of madness. Try to word 
backstory entries in a way that might push the character to 
pursue the Mythos, such as:
G An insatiable appetite for knowledge that man was 
not meant to know.
G Y ou cannot rest until the Cult of the Black Pharaoh 
is destroyed.
G Every night you dream of a sunken city; you hear 
voices calling your name.
G The answer must lie in the Necronomicon.
Non-Player  
Characters (NPCs)
The players control their investigators; the Keeper controls 
everyone else in the world, known as non-player characters. 
These can come into the game in a number of ways.
Y ou may find that players suggest ideas for non-player 
characters when making their investigators: relatives, 
colleagues, friends, or enemies. Refer to the investigators’ 
backstories for these and take careful note of any details for 
later incorporation into the scenario.
Investigators may establish contacts during the game 
(see Contacts, page 97).
Y our plot will include some key non-player characters—
the villains!
The game will inevitably lead to encountering new non-
player characters. Every street, every bar, every library has 
people in it for the investigators to talk to.
The important non-player characters in published 
scenarios will have their characteristics and a selection of 
skills already drawn up; however, there are always non-player 
characters the investigators will wish to speak to in addition to 
those already prepared. Y ou may need to come up with skills 
and characteristics for these improvised non-player characters 
as required during play—and this can easily be done. Of 
course, you will only need skills or characteristics for your 
non-player characters if they are opposing an investigator in 
some way—often you can just play the interaction without 
concern for any skill values or numbers.  
When an investigator makes a skill roll versus a non-player 
character, you will need to establish whether the difficulty 
level for the player is Regular, Hard, or Extreme. To do this, 
consider the skill or characteristic being used in opposition 
by the non-player character. As Keeper, you should make a 
swift and arbitrary decision whether a particular skill or 
characteristic is a key aspect of that character’s profession. 
If the skill or characteristic directly relates to the non-player 
character’s profession, then it would be rated at 50% or higher, 
Walter is creeping about in an old mansion when he 
hears someone coming and wants to hide. As the door 
opens, the Keeper asks for a Stealth roll. The Keeper fig-
ures that the opposing factor would be the Spot Hidden 
skill of the approaching non-player character. In this 
case the non-player character is a maid. The Keeper 
doesn’t have any statistics for the maid, but her pro-
fession does not imply or require a high Spot Hidden 
skill, thus the difficulty level is Regular (requiring a roll 
equal to or less than the investigator’s Stealth skill). If 
the person entering were a police detective, the difficul-
ty level would be Hard (requiring a roll equal to or less 
half than the investigator’s skill), as Spot Hidden can be 
assumed to be a key aspect of the detective’s profession.
===== PDF page index 201 (rulebook p.201) =====
190 
Call of Cthulhu
and thus the difficulty level should be Hard. If this is not the 
case, the skill is below 50%, so a Regular difficulty level is set. 
Only in truly exceptional circumstances should the difficulty 
level be set to Extreme (few non-player characters will have 
even a single skill of 90% or above).
If combat rolls are called for, arbitrarily assign some 
combat values on the spot: average Joe (unskilled) 25%; 
barroom brawler or hired thug 40%; trained killer 70%.
While prepared non-player characters will be provided 
with notes for you to interpret, ad-hoc non-player characters 
won’t have their personalities and goals predetermined. 
How you play these characters is up to you, but if you wish to 
introduce a random element, refer to Non-Player Character 
Reactions to the Investigators (see following page).
Roleplaying Non-Player Characters
Roleplay is at the heart of this game, and it’s your job as 
Keeper to reinforce this. While the players get to play one 
character each, you get to play everyone else, and the key 
thing is that you roleplay the non-player characters. Rather 
than telling the players what they learn from the barman, 
take the role of the barman yourself. Try to alter your voice, 
perhaps speaking with an appropriate accent or changing 
the tone and volume of your voice. Don’t be afraid to act 
the part, using gestures and mannerisms to help the players 
build a mental image of the person they are interacting with. 
It’s common for players to view the Keeper as being in 
charge of the game and as such they will look to you for how 
to play, modeling their performances on yours. Some people 
are a little shy, but when they see and hear you talking “in 
character, ” they will feel encouraged to do likewise. Teach 
by example and reward them for getting into the spirit of 
the game. If a player really gets into character and makes 
a strong argument, then you might reward the player by 
forgoing a Persuade roll, or at least lower the difficulty level 
of the roll. Don’t feel compelled to reward strong roleplaying 
every time; roleplaying is enjoyable in itself and shouldn’t 
require constant reward.
When possible, try to bring previously established non-
player characters back into play. Doing this builds the feeling of 
consistency and continuity. Consider how television shows do 
this. When investigators want to know the word on the street, 
they may visit the same bar where 
they are familiar with Bernie the 
barkeep. Bernie soon becomes 
a character in his own right and 
his story becomes entwined 
with that of the investigators. 
Placing non-player character 
contacts at risk will provide 
further motivation for the 
players. When the players hear 
that cultists picked Bernie the 
barkeep as a sacrifice to their 
dark god, it’s going to be more 
meaningful than if it were just 
an unknown victim.
Roleplaying Hooks
Everybody wants something. Have non-player characters 
approach the investigators with requests, demands, and 
problems. Consider how events in the story might create 
problems for non-player characters. These non-player 
characters will want help with their problems and, wherever 
possible, you should direct their requests for help to the 
investigators. If a non-player character has something the 
players want, the non-player character will probably want 
something in return. 
As an aid to presenting non-player characters in play, 
list two or three of these “roleplaying hooks” alongside 
each of the key non-player characters in your scenario. The 
hooks are more than personality traits or clues; they are 
plot drivers that allow the non-player character to hook an 
investigator like a fish on a line. Y our players will soon be 
pulled in multiple directions by various hooks and if most of 
these hooks are rooted in your core plot then your story will 
become more layered and engaging. 
Presenting the Authorities
The Keeper should define the function and purpose of a given 
authority in the context of the scenario. A sheriff or a judge, 
for instance, can be a great help or a great obstruction to an 
investigation; perhaps by controlling access to evidence, the 
non-player character may willfully pursue personal theories 
concerning a crime rather than cheerfully adopting the ideas 
of the investigators, and may even blindly order the arrest 
of the investigators as suspects, or hold them as material 
witnesses.
Uniformly portraying authorities as sleazy opportunists, 
corrupt fools, and rigid bumpkins enforces a cliché that can 
corrode the heart of the game. Call of Cthulhu assumes that 
The Keeper has noted the following roleplaying hooks 
for Parkin Withers (NPC):
G Parkin’s business (and possibly life) is under 
threat from the mob—he desperately needs help.
G Parkin knows that Ephraim Smith is a cultist and 
will seek some form of reward or recompense from 
the investigators in return for this information.
Harvey Walters regularly stops to chat over a 
drink with Parkin Withers. Harvey wants to know 
how Parkin got his black eye, and Parkin explains 
how a man is extorting money from him. Parkin 
wants Harvey’s help. The Keeper knows that this 
mystery man is tied in with the plot, as part of a local 
gang associated with a cult. If Harvey takes the bait 
and offers to help Parkin, the plot is progressed.
Parkin also possesses information pertaining 
to Harvey’s investigation, but in return he wants a 
package delivered. “It’s nothing suspect, but whatever 
you do, don’t open it… ”
Remember to 
present non-player 
characters in a 
believable way. The 
use of accents and 
mannerisms can 
quickly establish 
a character’s 
personality in 
the minds of the 
players. 
===== PDF page index 202 (rulebook p.202) =====
191 
chapter 10: playing the game
humanity and human civilization considers itself worth 
defending and saving. However bad humanity can be, the 
Mythos is far worse. Since investigators risk their lives to save 
such people, some authorities must be shown to be worth 
the struggle. The truth is that some are and some are not. 
If the investigators encounter authorities with well-rounded 
characters, freely capable of good and bad, they can make up 
their own minds about the value of society.
Non-Player Character Reactions to 
the Investigators
Y ou decide how non-player characters react to an 
investigator; however, if you want to test the  non-player 
character’s reaction to an investigator, you can make a 
concealed roll using either the investigator's APP or Credit 
Rating. Which one you use is determined by the situation 
and the non-player character; ask yourself whether wealth 
or looks is more likely to influence the particular non-player 
character? If you are unsure, use the higher of the two. It’s a 
good idea to take note of each investigator’s APP and Credit 
Rating skill at the start of the game.
To perform the test, roll 1D100 and compare it to either 
the investigator's Credit Rating or APP . If the dice result is 
below the target number, the reaction is positive; otherwise 
the reaction is negative. How you portray a positive or 
negative reaction in play is up to you. An initial negative 
reaction should make the investigator's life more difficult, 
especially if the player’s intention is to befriend or influence 
the non-player character. This test is intended for use with 
non-player characters who have no outstanding reason to 
like or dislike the investigator.
Playing Within the  
Limits of Character Knowledge
When roleplaying non-player characters, remember that 
they don’t know everything that you know as Keeper. It’s 
easy to make non-player characters infallible, but it can be 
a lot more fun to play up their flaws. Non-player characters 
can make mistakes, misunderstand, and fail just as readily as 
the investigators. Cultists are only human, so let them make 
human mistakes too. Their mistakes may serve to further 
confound the players, who may seek some rationale for the 
non-player characters’ curiously mistaken activities.
Prepare a List of Names
Y ou will have to name non-player characters during play. It’s 
a good idea to have a list of names ready so that you can 
pick one with ease rather than fumbling around only to 
come up with a common name such as “Bob” . Fumbling for 
a name is a sure sign to the players that the character is not 
central to the plot, and you should try to make all non-player 
characters feel equally real. Using names appropriate for the 
place and period gives an increased sense of realism. Once 
you’ve decided that the owner of the Castle Stahleck is called 
Fabian Azoth, you simply make a quick note alongside the 
name on your list for future reference.
Pick-Up Non-Player Characters
As previously stated, players play their investigators and you 
play the non-player characters. Occasionally a situation may 
present itself in which it is possible to hand a group of non-
player characters over to the players’ control, thus allowing 
the non-player characters to be played by the players 
(temporarily replacing their investigators) for a time. 
Pick-up non-player characters don’t require a full 
character sheet; indeed, the less you give the player, the 
freer the player may feel. Sometimes it is easier to improvise 
around a simple archetype than to portray a fully detailed 
character. A simple index card with a name, profession and a 
few key characteristics or skills is enough for one scene—fill 
Harvey Walters enters a police station late at night. 
The place is busy with arrested late-night brawlers 
and drunks. The Keeper wants to randomly deter -
mine the desk sergeant's reaction to Harvey; the desk 
sergeant is more likely to be impressed by wealth than 
looks and so Credit Rating is more important in this 
instance than APP . Harvey has a Credit Rating score 
of 41. The Keeper rolls 83—well above 41, indicat -
ing a failure and thus a poor reaction. Harvey will 
get short shrift from this overworked and already 
agitated officer.
Using Props to  
Present NPCs
Games of Call of Cthulhu  can feature a wide variety 
of non-player characters—that’s before we even get 
to the monsters! Keeping track of who’s who can be 
daunting for both the Keeper and the players. Preparing 
some simple props ahead of the game can help.
A quick and easy way to differentiate between 
non-player characters is to find a portrait for each of 
them. Most published scenarios include a drawing 
or photograph of each of the important non-player 
characters that the investigators will meet. Having a 
copy of these allows you to show the players who 
they are speaking to. If you are running a scenario 
of your own design or one where images of the non-
player characters are not provided, a quick search on 
the Internet can provide a range of suitable character 
portraits for you to print and cut out. Try looking 
at websites featuring people of the period in which 
the game is set. For example, galleries of 1920s film 
stars are available and provide a perfect resource for 
Keepers.

===== PDF page index 203 (rulebook p.203) =====
192 
Call of Cthulhu

===== PDF page index 204 (rulebook p.204) =====
193 
chapter 10: playing the game
in any other statistics as they are called for. If it’s a combat 
scene then combat skills, weapons, and hit points should be 
detailed in advance or quickly generated in play.
Playing a non-player character allows the player to 
“see” through the eyes of a character that is not his or her 
usual investigator and discover things that the player would 
otherwise be unaware of. This conflict of knowledge happens 
all the time in roleplaying—every time the investigators 
split up, a player may hear about things that are not being 
perceived through his or her investigator. The latter is 
easily overlooked as it can be generally assumed that fellow 
investigators fill each other in on what they have discovered. 
How you and your players deal with knowledge gained when 
playing pick-up non-player characters is up to you. This 
technique of playing other characters can be used to build 
tension and boost the horror. 
Making the Most of the  
Investigator’s  Backstory
The investigator backstory can be a springboard for story 
development. Consider how each investigator’s backstory 
could drive the story forward and provide plot inspiration. 
While some backstory entries could possibly link to the 
scenario’s central plot, the majority are more likely to form 
the basis for subplots. The players will be more involved 
if you can weave such entries into the broad story of the 
scenario.
Corrupting Backstory  
Entries as a Result of Madness
The only way to hurt a man who has lost everything is to give 
him back something broken.
—Stephen Donaldson, The Wounded Land
When preparing a scenario (or between sessions), think 
about the investigators’ backstories and how the entries 
might be corrupted, undermined or distorted, given the 
likely events of the scenario. 
This is a game of horror, and horror is most effective 
when it hits close to home. In Lovecraft’s story The Shadow 
over Innsmouth, the threat to the narrator’s sanity comes 
not from the terrible monsters he encounters but from the 
realization concerning his own bloodline.
Plan out your intentions regarding investigator 
backstories from the outset so that they can be woven into 
The investigators have managed to persuade the 
police that a SWAT team is required to assault the 
cult’s hideout. Rather than simply telling the players 
the outcome of the operation, the Keeper decides it 
would be fun to allow the players to play members of 
the SWAT team for the duration of the mission. This 
is especially effective, since the role of the non-player 
characters contrasts with that of the investigators. 
Playing a combat-trained, well-armed professional 
provides a major change of pace to a player whose 
investigator is a college professor.
The Keeper gives the players some pick-up non-player 
characters to play—a group of students living in a 
shared house. The players don’t know anything about 
the house or the non-player characters, and they just 
play the characters as they see fit. Only one scene is 
played out, in which one of the pick-up non-player 
characters is possessed (at the Keeper’s direction) by 
some supernatural force and murders his compan -
ions. The players love the scene as it is quick and 
gruesome! What’s more, their investigators are not 
under threat, so the players can relax and enjoy the 
action without fear that their main character will die.
The players then return to playing their 
investigators with no idea how the pick-up non-player 
characters link in with their story. However, while 
following up a future lead, the investigators are invited 
to dinner by a town councilor. While roleplaying the 
dinner scene, the Keeper drops hints to the players that 
this is the very house in which the earlier murder scene 
took place. The players know what is happening but 
their investigators do not—this dichotomy increases 
the tension. As the penny drops, the Keeper mentions 
how quiet the councilor has become and how his face 
changes as he takes hold of the carving knife…
The Keeper reviews Harvey Walters’ backstory and 
occupation, and considers how they might be brought 
into the game:
“Uncle Theodore, who inspired a love of 
archaeology. Harvey will prove himself a better man 
than his uncle, who was driven mad by his obsessions. ”
Given that the scenario features the mi-go, the 
Keeper decides that one of Uncle Theodore’s artifacts 
could be a Mist Projector (see Chapter 13: Artifacts 
and Alien Devices ). Perhaps after encountering the 
mi-go, Harvey might be given an INT roll to see if he 
recognizes the artifact.
“Journalist. ”
Harvey talks to a publisher about his idea for a 
story (based upon his encounters with the mi-go). The 
publisher mentions it in passing to another author 
who suspects Harvey’s tale is more fact than fiction. 
Is this other author in league with the mi-go or a 
potential ally?
“Handsome, well-dressed and a little overweight. ”
It is not so easy to see how this can be used. Perhaps 
Harvey’s tailor might be persuaded to disclose useful 
information regarding his other clients.

===== PDF page index 205 (rulebook p.205) =====
194 
Call of Cthulhu
the story. When a backstory entry is later corrupted, the 
revelation will flow naturally and be more pertinent to both 
the player and the overall story.
It can sometimes be difficult to come up with an 
appropriate entry in the middle of a game, so having a list 
of ideas prepared before the game can help, either tailored to 
specific investigators or just a general list that can be tweaked 
and handed out as needed. 
Each time an investigator experiences a bout of madness, 
you may add or amend a backstory entry on the investigator’s 
sheet. Corrupting an existing backstory entry rather than 
replacing it with something completely new can be more 
effective in building the story, and serves to maintain a 
sense of continuity. Changing a backstory entry may have a 
direct effect on the investigator’s mind—the game reality has 
not changed; rather, the investigator has had a realization 
concerning some aspect of it.
Y ou are never compelled to amend backstory entries as 
a result of investigator insanity or injury. It may be that the 
game is in full flow and you do not wish to pause the action 
while you consider. Or it may be that you have changed an 
investigator’s backstory recently and do not wish to make 
any further alterations at the time. If you wish, you can delay 
the changes to allow yourself time to think, and then apply 
them before the next session of play.
Rolling Dice
Dice Rule 1: The Keeper decides when to call for a skill roll. 
Y ou (as Keeper) decide on the difficulty level for each skill roll 
and, by extension, decide whether a skill roll is required at all. 
If the task is routine and no drama is involved then it doesn’t 
require a roll. There may be instances when you want the action 
to move on quickly or want to avoid adding complications to 
the proceedings and allow the players to do something difficult 
without a roll; as Keeper, this is your prerogative.
Dice Rule 2: Dice don’t tell stories; people do.
The dice do not decide what winning or losing means in 
your story; that’s the Keeper’s job. When a player wins a skill 
roll, his or her goal is achieved (as agreed before the roll), but 
when they lose, the Keeper decides what happens.
Dice Rule 3: Losing a roll doesn’t necessarily mean failing 
the goal.
There are two possible outcomes of a skill roll: win or lose. 
It is important to realize that losing a dice roll does not 
automatically lead to failing the task. 
Things go the way the player wants when a Pushed skill 
roll is won (the player’s goal is achieved). 
When a player loses in a Pushed skill roll things go the 
way the Keeper wants (the goal may or may not be achieved 
and additional negative consequences occur).
One of the keys to running a good game is learning 
to define how winning or losing a dice roll translates into 
events in your story. Describe the outcome, not the dice roll.
If the player loses the roll then you get to decide what 
happens. Problems can arise if you declare an outcome that 
blocks play.
The Keeper reviews Harvey Walters’ backstory and 
considers how each entry might be amended as a 
result of insanity:
1. “Uncle Theodore, who inspired a love of 
archaeology. Harvey will prove himself a better man 
than his uncle, who was driven mad by his obsessions. ”
Uncle Theodore could either turn out to be an 
evildoer, or Harvey could just believe him to be one 
as a result of paranoia. This entry could be corrupted 
to read, “Uncle Theodore is a bad influence. I must 
do what I can to save his soul, ” or “Uncle Theodore’s 
artifacts present a danger to the world and must be 
destroyed!” or “Uncle Theodore is trying to recruit me 
as a cultist. ”
2. “Fate. Looks for signs and omens. ”
This could become “I begin to foresee the end of 
days, ” or, “I have been chosen as a prophet and must 
tell people of what is to come. ” Alternatively it might 
take a superstitious bent, “Careful not to tread on the 
cracks in the pavement. ”
3. “Handsome, well-dressed and a little overweight. ”
A love of good clothes speaks of a materialistic 
person who takes pride in fashion and appearance. 
This may be altered to “Disdainful of material 
wealth, ” or “Unaware of how ragged my clothes have 
become. ”
Martha discovers the secret of her mother's heirloom mirror.
===== PDF page index 206 (rulebook p.206) =====
195 
chapter 10: playing the game
Dice Rule 4: Dice are used to determine who tells the story.
On winning a skill roll, the player gets to say what happens 
next. What the player can say has already been agreed with 
the Keeper when the goal was set. If you feel that the player 
is overstepping the mark (going far beyond the stated goal) 
you may veto the player’s comments, perhaps calling for a 
subsequent dice roll.
If the player loses a dice roll, you have free rein to 
describe any outcome you wish. Usually this will mean 
that the player’s goal is not realized; however, you are not 
constrained to presenting the opposite of the player’s 
goal—the player’s goal could be fully or partially achieved 
along with a consequence. The Keeper’s job is to create an 
interesting outcome, preferably one that develops the theme 
of horror in the story.
One way to think of this is to compare it to a football 
game in which the two teams battle for possession of the 
ball. In Call of Cthulhu  the player and Keeper battle for 
“possession” of the story. The side that wins the dice roll gets 
to run with the metaphorical ball for a while.
Dice Rule 5: Avoid consecutive rolls against the same skill.
Asking a player to make a skill roll more than once for the 
same task greatly reduces the likelihood of the player winning 
the roll. An investigator with a Stealth skill of 50% obviously 
has a 50% chance of winning (at Regular difficulty level). If 
the player is asked to make this roll twice in succession, the 
chance of passing both rolls drops to 25%. Therefore, if there 
are three guard posts and each must be passed to enter the 
cult base, rather than asking for three consecutive Stealth 
rolls, you could call for one roll to cover all three, allowing 
the one winning roll to stand so that no further rolls will be 
required for a time. If you feel that there being three guard 
posts makes the task significantly harder then you can raise 
the difficulty level. 
Dice Rule 6: Roll dice in full view.
Both players and Keeper should roll the dice in full view 
and use the result as rolled. If you find that dice rolls bring 
unwanted consequences, you should read through Dice 
Rules 1 to 4 again. The only exception to this is when the 
Keeper is making a “concealed roll, ” such as for Psychology 
rolls (see Contacts, page 97).
Setting Difficulty Levels
The difficulty level of a given task should be the same for 
everyone and should not be altered according to the skill of 
the person attempting it. If the difficulty level for a climb is 
declared as being Hard it remains Hard regardless of whether 
one is a novice or an expert climber.  The skill percentage 
is what makes the difference; the person with the greater 
Climb skill has a greater chance of winning the roll.
If you feel that a task is so easy that it would be routine, you 
can either not call for a roll (the task is simply accomplished) 
or you may ask for a roll at Regular difficulty (or give a Bonus 
die), but make the consequence of failure be very mild. 
A routine task that relates directly to an investigator’s 
occupation should be achieved automatically; remember, 
only roll dice for important and dramatic reasons.
Ask the Player
Ask questions of the players. Encourage the players to talk in 
terms of their investigators’ actions rather than using rules 
terminology. When a player proposes an action by asking to 
make a roll, ask questions about what the investigator is actually 
doing. It’s the Keeper’s job to ask the player to make a roll. Asking 
to make a roll does not convey the drama of the situation.
The investigators are locked in a room that is rapidly 
filling with water and have no hope of rescue. Their 
only way out is through a locked door. Andrew sets a 
goal for his investigator to “Pick the lock on the door”. 
He fails and feels compelled to push the roll. He does 
not request any foreshadowing—the consequence of 
being trapped underwater is self-evident. He loses 
a second time, placing the outcome in the Keeper’s 
hands. The group has only been playing for an hour 
and dying now would bring the session to a prema -
ture end. This presents a problem: the investigators 
are all going to drown if the door remains closed. The 
Keeper considers the options.
Devise a prompt rescue (which may feel like a 
contrivance). 
Allow for some additional rolls (which of course 
might also be lost, leaving the players in the same 
situation).
Have the consequence of losing the Pushed roll be 
that the room fills with water, but just before everyone 
drowns, Andrew’s investigator manages to open the 
door and everyone is carried out on a wave of water.
Clearly the final option is preferable. The 
investigators should take some damage as part of the 
consequence, but they survive and the game goes on. 
The player has achieved his goal, but at a significant 
cost because he failed the Locksmith roll.
Harvey’s player is trying to open a puzzle-box. 
“Can I make an INT roll to try to open it”, the 
player asks. 
“What are you actually doing with the box?”, 
asks the Keeper, prompting the player to elaborate.
Harvey’s player thinks for a moment. “I’m going 
to spend a while studying the various symbols, 
perhaps looking some of them up in my Uncle’s 
books, and see if I can figure out how to turn the 
various sides until it opens. ”
“Sounds good. OK, give me an INT roll”.
Notice how the Keeper’s question coaxed some 
extra description and story from the player.
===== PDF page index 207 (rulebook p.207) =====
196 
Call of Cthulhu
Encourage the players to describe the way in which their 
goals are achieved when they win the roll. Think of it as 
shining a spotlight on the player and placing a microphone 
under his or her nose. Don’t be unnecessarily restrictive 
when it comes to what you allow a player to narrate. With 
a goal of “breaking the door down, ” does it really matter 
whether the player describes it as, “I force the door with 
my shoulder until the latch pops off, ” or “I charge the door, 
smashing it asunder, sending splinters of wood flying across 
the room?” If it’s a matter of inconsequential details and the 
player has enjoyed describing his or her investigator’s actions, 
just smile and say, “Y es!” Try to avoid restating or rephrasing 
what the player just said—doing so is unnecessarily and may 
undermine the player’s contribution.
Some players may roll the dice and look at you to tell them 
what happens: “I rolled 14 to break down the door. That’s 
a success. What happens?” Throw the question back and 
encourage the player to elaborate. “Cool, tell us how you do it” .
Some players may go to the other extreme and 
describe everything that happens, including non-player 
characters’ reactions and more. How far you allow the 
player to go when it comes to describing how their goal is 
achieved is up to you. Y ou have veto if the player goes too far, 
and you will develop a feel for what “too far” means. 
Learn to differentiate between descriptive color and 
mechanical effect. How the player describes breaking down 
the door isn’t really important—it’s just color. The dice were 
rolled, the goal was achieved, and the door is broken down. 
From another point of view, this descriptive color is of utmost 
importance, as it is this description that builds the story and 
makes the game more interesting and fun.
There is only a mechanical effect on the game when 
the player goes beyond color and adds something that will 
affect future dice rolls. This is where you need to use your 
judgment on whether to accept, veto, or adapt the player’s 
description. If what the player asks for or describes seems 
reasonable, you can allow it, but don’t make life too easy for 
the player—remember that this is a horror game. Y ou can 
veto it, but where possible try to adapt it or offer an alternative 
rather than blocking the player’s suggestion. If you feel unsure 
whether to allow it or not, you can ask for a Luck roll. 
Pushing the Roll—Pushing the Horror
Sometimes, a player will simply ask, “Can I push that?” 
Remember the advice—ask questions of the players. 
Players must always describe the extra effort or action their 
investigators make to justify a pushed roll—if it sounds 
insufficient then suggest what more might be done. A pushed 
roll should usually be possible, but events in the story must 
account for it. 
When a player loses a pushed roll, he or she is giving 
you, the Keeper, license to make the investigators’ lives more 
difficult. Y ou should think of a consequence that takes the 
investigators one step nearer to their doom. It may be some 
unexpected occurrence, perhaps even one that is unrelated 
to the subject of the skill roll.
The consequence should be more than failure. Every 
time a player loses a pushed roll, you should try to steer 
the game towards the theme of horror. This may not always 
be possible, but have that as your goal: a pushed roll is your 
chance to push the horror.
Harvey wins a skill roll to break a door down. The play-
er describes Harvey’s actions thus: “I charge the door 
and smash it, sending splinters of wood flying across 
the room. There’s a guard there, right?” The Keeper 
nods. The player then says, “OK, the guard cowers and 
drops his weapon in surprise. I run over and grab the 
gun while he’s pulling splinters out of his face!”
You may feel that the player has gotten a little 
carried away here, but it’s creating good story. The 
Keeper decides to rewind the action a little to where 
the investigator is running at the guard, stating, “The 
guard sees you coming and makes a grab for his fallen 
weapon as he rolls away from you. Sounds like you’re 
trying to get it before him, right?”
Bang—it’s an exciting action scene. All that’s 
happened is that the player has achieved his goal of 
getting through the door and is now grappling the 
guard. The only thing that the player’s description 
really added was that the guard has dropped his 
weapon and the Keeper feels this is acceptable in the 
circumstances. The guard would normally have to 
draw a weapon, so either way the weapon is not in 
the guard’s hand at that moment. The whole thing 
about the splinters in the guard’s face is just color and 
has no effect on the dice or hit points.
Delusions can lead to investigators acting irrationally
===== PDF page index 208 (rulebook p.208) =====
197 
chapter 10: playing the game
Alternatively, if the investigator is insane at the time of 
losing the pushed roll then this presents a prime opportunity 
to introduce a delusion:
Verbal Conflicts
Verbal confrontations should be roleplayed at the table 
with much gusto and performance. However, when there’s 
a genuine conflict, you will want to pick up the dice. See 
Charm, Fast Talk, Intimidate, and Persuade Skills: 
Difficulty Levels (page 93) for further details.
Y ou must decide when a non-player character can be 
coerced and when they cannot. It might require a pretty face, 
a threat, a bribe, and so on, but most people can be won over 
with the right approach. Even the most evil of cultists might 
be conned or succumb to threats or persuasion if the players 
somehow find the non-player character’s weakness. Always 
work within the confines of the story—the cult boss would 
not knowingly be persuaded of anything by someone who is 
clearly an enemy, but if the investigator inveigles their way 
into the cult, they might stand a chance.
Violence and Sanity Rolls
Intimidation may use threats of physical violence. One 
suggested consequence of losing a pushed Intimidation roll 
is to have the investigator unintentionally carry out his or 
her threat. The player may not want to shoot the non-player 
character in the kneecap, but pushing the roll can result 
in unwanted outcomes. The use of such violence in that 
situation would constitute torture, and the Keeper may wish 
to ask for Sanity rolls for the participating investigators.
Taking a life in a game is easy—we grew up doing it in 
make-up games as children, we do it in video games, we watch 
it on television, and so on. Actually doing it in real life is a 
whole other matter. Y ou may wish to reflect this in your game 
by calling for a Sanity roll (SAN 0/1D6) when an investigator 
first kills a person, whether or not it is in cold blood.
Cold-blooded murder is especially difficult, and an 
investigator may find themselves incapable of doing it. Such 
callous behavior may require the player to fail a Sanity roll 
Matthew asks a hotel receptionist if a certain person 
has stayed at the hotel recently. After failing initially, 
he refuses to take no for an answer and offers a bribe. 
The Keeper grants a pushed roll. Thinking fast, the 
Keeper foreshadows the consequence: “Your persis -
tence may cause offense, perhaps more. ” It’s vague, 
but it’s what the investigator might expect. Matthew 
fails the pushed roll and the Keeper considers how to 
make life more difficult for the investigator and push 
the horror theme. Up to this point the Keeper had 
not considered the receptionist but, as a result of this 
pushed roll, the Keeper decides that the receptionist is 
allied with the investigator’s enemies and will inform 
them of the investigator’s enquiry. To increase the ten-
sion, the Keeper hints at this within the consequence. 
“The receptionist holds up his hands and with a slight 
smile says, ‘I’m sorry sir, I’ve never heard of this 
gentleman’. A few moments later, as you’re leaving 
the hotel, you see him speaking on the phone. You 
catch his eye and he looks away hastily. ”
Notice that the receptionist had not been considered 
a threat until the player lost the pushed roll. It was 
only then that the Keeper changed the status of the 
receptionist, adding yet another pawn to the enemy.
If in the example above, Matthew’s investigator were 
insane, the Keeper might pick an alternative conse -
quence, choosing to hit Matthew’s investigator with a 
delusion. “The receptionist is clearly losing his patience 
with you. He informs you again that he knows nothing 
of the person of whom you are enquiring. As he loudly 
states the name, you notice another guest staring hard 
at you. Something writhes beneath his shirt. His skin 
is slick with sweat, his eyes are fixed on you and he is 
mumbling something you can’t quite make out and 
making strange movements with his left hand. ” In reality 
this is just another mundane guest at the hotel, however 
Matthew (the player) doesn’t know that and (suspecting 
a delusion) asks for a reality check (see Reality check 
rolls, page 162). He fails the roll, sending his investigator 
into a bout of madness. The Keeper decides that, during 
his bout of madness, the investigator attacks the inno-
cent bystander until he is restrained by hotel staff, who 
then summon the police. The Keeper tells Matthew that 
the next thing his investigator is aware of is lying on the 
floor, pinned by a police officer’s knee, while nearby a 
man’s beaten body is being attended to by hotel staff. He 
has a lot of questions to answer.
Hasna has taken a cultist captive and tries to get him 
to reveal the cult’s plans. The Keeper asks what Hasna 
is doing to elicit information from the cultist and it 
soon becomes clear that intimidation is being used 
rather than persuasion. The cultist has low Intimidate 
and Psychology (both below 50%), so the difficulty 
level starts at Regular. Given the cultist’s motivation, 
the Keeper raises the level of difficulty to Extreme. 
There is a slim that chance the cultist will crack!
In this case, Hasna’s goal is possible as the cultist 
is relatively ineffective; however, if the cultist had an 
Intimidate or Psychology skill over 50%, the initial 
difficulty level would be Hard, and by raising the 
difficulty level by two steps the goal would become 
impossible. In that case the cultist would not crack 
unless Hasna could do something to “up her game, ” 
such as using threats of, or actual, violence (in the 
case of Intimidate). 
===== PDF page index 209 (rulebook p.209) =====
198 
Call of Cthulhu
before they are able to pull the trigger on a fellow human 
being. There is, after all, a word for people who can carry 
out such acts without flinching—psychopaths. A psychopath 
would have a low Sanity and thus be able to do such acts 
without their conscience stepping in to prevent them.
Pacing the Game
Y our role is like that of an orchestra conductor: you set the 
tempo. Giving a good pace to the game can be essential, 
keeping everyone interested and excited. Some scenes have 
a natural end and the game progresses organically; others 
have the risk of becoming overextended and dull. Try to 
keep things moving, but bear in mind that sometimes the 
players need a chance to catch their breath and review the 
situation. Combats and chases demand fast-paced action and 
quick decisions from yourself and the players. Sometimes 
the players may disagree about how to proceed. When two 
players get caught up in a discussion about whether to stay in 
the musty old cellar or to make a break for freedom, you can 
take a step back and give them time to talk and work things 
out. If the players are animated you can take that as a sure 
sign that they are enjoying the game. If players are arguing 
about rules then you should offer arbitration; otherwise just 
sit back and rest your voice for a while.
If everyone is enjoying themselves, there’s no problem; 
however, if some players are getting bored or the discussion 
is becoming repetitive, you should move things on. Do what 
you can to introduce some drama and push the players 
towards some form of action. For example, have a desperate 
non-player character call upon the investigators for aid. 
Another option is to discuss the likelihood of success of their 
various plans. Alternatively, if they are completely stuck or 
cannot agree on how to proceed, you can offer them an Idea 
roll (following page).
A key aspect of your job as Keeper is to build an 
atmosphere of tension, and the way you pace the game is 
key to this. Y ou may start with a low-key opening and take 
a slow-boil approach, gradually building the tension as the 
game reaches a climax. Alternatively you may kick the game 
off with a bang, starting the story in medias res, guns blazing, 
then alternate between tense dramatic scenes and high-
action scenes. Keep your finger on the pulse of the game, 
allowing it to slow down at times, but always be ready to 
draw a scene to a close and push the game on.
A one-off game should have a beginning, a middle, and 
an end, with escalating tension throughout. If the game is 
being run across multiple sessions, a different structure is 
required. Rather than building to an ending, the Keeper 
should have next session in mind. Try to end each session 
on a cliffhanger or some kind of revelation. Leave the players 
with an unanswered question. The realization that things are 
about to take a turn for the worse or the investigators are in 
much deeper than they first thought can be a real driver. If 
none of these things are available for the session climax, then 
a blood-pumping combat scene or chase can provide a great 
ending. 
The majority of roleplaying games are based upon 
acquisition of skills and stuff, whereas Call of Cthulhu is a game 
of attrition. Be mindful when pacing or planning sessions that 
the effect of the horror genre on characters is different from 
that of a standard fantasy adventure game. In the latter the 
characters may be fighters and wizards exploring dungeons, 
accruing experience, wealth, and power as they do so. They may 
risk life and limb with every fight, but they soon recover and 
grow more effective as the game progresses. Contrast this with 
characters in a horror story, who rarely increase in effectiveness 
and for whom each challenge chips away at their physical and 
mental resources, with injuries taking considerable time to heal. 
A low-level monster may cease to be the threat that it was for 
experienced characters in some other games, but a low-level 
monster in Call of Cthulhu remains a threat no matter how 
experienced an investigator becomes.
Take note of how your players react to events in the 
game. If they are blasé about the dangers their investigators 
face then increase the threat level. If the reverse is true and 
they are cautious about every minor action, so suspicious 
that they never accept a drink from a non-player character 
or spend ages planning for every eventuality, this may be a 
product of previous gaming experiences in which the games 
moderator was overly harsh. If this is the case, you should 
ease off a little or reassure them when the risks they are 
taking are reasonable.
Problems With Players
Solving all potential problems between players is beyond the 
scope of this book. As Keeper, you are responsible for more 
of the game than an individual player, however you should 
not feel that everything is your responsibility. Whether a 
game goes well or not is due to your whole gaming group, 
not just you. If problems arise then be ready to stop and talk 
to your players if you feel the need to do so.
If you feel that one person is dominating the game, 
encourage the quieter players to participate. Imagine your 
players are actors on the stage and you are in control of the 
spotlight; by addressing questions to different players you 
are shifting the light from one player to another.
One investigator can’t be present in more than one place 
at one time, though some players will attempt to have their 
investigator be omnipresent. If this is an issue then be clear 
about where investigators are—you may even consider using 
a map and counters to clearly illustrate investigator location. 
If one player’s counter is in the kitchen and another is in the 
attic, then when dealing with the investigator in the attic you 
shine the spotlight on and speak to that player only—remind 
the other player of the situation if he or she attempts to butt in.
Handling a group of people is an important skill for a 
Keeper to learn. Hopefully everyone is enthusiastic and full 
of ideas, but if they all speak over each other you will have 
chaos. Focus is the answer. Focus your attention on only 
the players who are in the present scene and ask the other 
players to be patient. Remember you can cut from one scene 
to another whenever you want, but you must take control of 
this and be aware that you are doing it. 
===== PDF page index 210 (rulebook p.210) =====
199 
chapter 10: playing the game
If the investigators have split up, be clear about which 
investigators are at the present scene. Resolve the scene or 
bring it to an interesting point, perhaps at a moment of great 
conflict, then cut to the other investigators and do the same 
for them. Don’t leave any single player inactive for too long. 
Consider the structure of television drama and place yourself 
in the role of director; you get to call “action” and “cut” . 
Usually you will have multiple investigators in a given 
scene. Talk to the players who are involved in the scene and ask 
questions about what each investigator is doing. Do not allow 
a player to dictate the actions of another player’s investigator. 
If one player states that another player’s investigator is doing 
something, turn to the player of that other investigator and 
ask them what they are doing. Remember that not everything 
relies on consensus. If an investigator is holding a grenade 
and the player states, “I’m pulling the pin, ” then it is pulled 
regardless of what the other players might say. A player might 
attempt to interfere in the activity of another investigator 
through the actions of their own investigator, but one player 
cannot declare the actions of another player’s investigator.
Running With  
What the Players Throw at You
Y our players may well take an approach to the story that 
you have not thought of or planned for. Many Keepers will 
be tempted to block the players’ progress, simply saying 
no and steering the players back towards the story that the 
Keeper has prepared. Instead of that, where possible, try to 
incorporate the players’ suggestions, especially if you can add 
complications of your own to their contribution. Wherever 
possible you should try to have an attitude of “Y es, and… ” or 
“Y es, but… ” rather than a flat “No” .
The Idea Roll
The players’ perception of the game world is formed by what 
you tell them; they cannot perceive what is in your head, 
only what you say. The players’ next step in a game may seem 
obvious to you but elude the players themselves. Y ou should 
seek a balance between spoon-feeding clues to the players 
and being overly secretive; this may sound easy, but it is not. 
Invariably the players will misinterpret or simply forget clues 
that are required for the game to progress. It may be that 
as your story unfolds you are unable to provide a certain 
important clue to the players. This may cause the game to 
stall and the fear of this happening can be a source of anxiety 
among Keepers and players alike. A dice roll to allow the 
investigator to gain a clue is all very well, but what if the 
players lose the roll? Do you just ask them to make another 
roll and another until they succeed?
This is where the Idea roll comes in. The players will get 
the clue regardless of whether they pass the Idea roll or not. 
An Idea roll is a highly significant and unusual event in the 
game. The roll determines not if, but how they get the clue. 
The goal of an Idea roll is always “to get the investigation 
back on track” . The Keeper starts by figuring out which was 
the most important clue the players missed and uses this to 
set a difficulty level for the Idea roll as follows. One player 
(whose investigator has the highest INT) then rolls dice for 
the Idea roll:
i If the Keeper never mentioned the clue, the difficulty 
level is Regular (requiring the player to roll equal to 
or less than their investigator’s INT). The likelihood 
of winning this roll is high—it is hardly fair to expect 
the players to act on something that they don’t know 
about.
i If the clue was definitely mentioned (but not em -
phasized), the difficulty level of the Idea roll is Hard. 
The players have had the chance to pick up on this 
clue and missed it. If weeks of real world time have 
passed since the clue was mentioned, you might 
want to use Regular difficulty level for this. This is 
the default difficulty level for an Idea roll.
i If the clue was made clear by the Keeper ( i.e. 
mentioned several times) or the players discussed 
it themselves, the difficulty level of the Idea roll is 
Extreme. 
The setting of difficulty levels for Idea rolls may appear 
counterintuitive; the more obvious a clue was made, the more 
difficult the Idea roll is. The Keeper is not trying to figure out 
the likelihood of the investigators realizing the clue—this 
is something they are incapable of, as fictional characters. 
The Keeper is offering the players a gamble, asking them to 
risk the negative consequences to gain the clue. A part of 
the role of players is to take note of clues during the game. 
There is a balance between the Keeper giving clues out and 
the players taking clues in. The Idea roll aims to reflect this 
balance. If the clue has never been mentioned, the balance 
must be redressed in the players’ favor and this is achieved 
by giving the players a strong chance of getting the clue for 
free. If the clue has been made obvious but somehow missed 
by the players, the players have had their chance and so they 
are owed no redress, and thus the Idea roll is set to Extreme 
difficulty level.
An investigator decides to make a telephone call to 
the local police. The Keeper has three options:
No: The Keeper could tell the players that they are 
the investigators and that it is not in the spirit of the 
game for them to call the police. This is clearly not a 
pleasing option for anyone.
Y es, and…: Rather than blocking the action, 
the Keeper might tell how the phone line is cut off or 
the police station unobtainable, or that only strange 
unearthly voices can be heard on the line.
Y es, but…: Perhaps a policeman turns up promptly, 
but he is corrupt and in league with the cult.
===== PDF page index 211 (rulebook p.211) =====
200 
Call of Cthulhu
Winning the Idea Roll
If the players win the Idea roll, the Keeper should deliver the 
clue. The information should be enough to get the story going 
again with a strong direction. The Keeper should weave the 
delivery of the “idea” into the story rather than simply giving 
out the information. If the clue was never mentioned at all, 
some creativity is required in how the players attain the clue. 
When an Idea roll is made, the Keeper has complete 
control of the situation and can move time on or place the 
investigators in whatever situation is judged appropriate; 
however, you should not increase their level of danger as the 
result of a winning roll.
Losing the Idea Roll—In the Thick of It
If the players lose the Idea roll they find themselves in deep 
trouble. A lost Idea roll gives the Keeper permission to put 
any of the investigators (regardless of who rolled dice) in the 
“thick of things. ” The Keeper should consider the clue on 
offer and try to come up with the worst situation in which 
the investigators might realize it. The Keeper starts the 
game again in medias res and the players must deal with the 
situation in which they find themselves.
Y ou may well find that your group never resorts to using 
the Idea roll. Indeed, you may find that your group is never 
at a loose end and always have some ideas of their own as to 
how the story might proceed. Alternatively, the players may 
get stuck, but be so cautious that they refuse to call for an Idea 
roll. If this is the case, you can draw the current chapter of the 
game to a close and carry out investigator development phase 
(rolling skill improvement and so on). Then ask the players 
what their likely courses of action might now be. If you feel 
the players lack direction, you should insist on starting the 
next part of the game with an Idea roll, using it to determine 
whether things restart well for the investigators or not.
Luck for Non-Player Characters
If you decide ahead of time that the players will meet the 
arch-villain in a warehouse, and that the investigators will 
neither catch nor kill him, then you have already scripted 
the events and the players will be no more than pawns in 
your story. Remember, Call of Cthulhu centers on a shared 
story created by both the Keeper and the players. Avoid 
predetermining events in which the players will be involved.
However, let us assume you want to do your best to keep 
the arch-villain alive or out of the investigators’ hands. One 
way to achieve this outcome is to give the arch-villain a Luck 
pool—this does not guarantee escape, but it greatly increases 
the villain’s effectiveness and improves the chances of any 
Using the previous example, what if the Idea roll had 
been lost? The Keeper has identified a clue to give to 
the players (the shopkeeper and his link to the cult). 
The Keeper states, “You spend four weeks [Note: time 
has been wasted—that’s part of the consequence of 
losing the Idea roll] going over previous leads and 
come up with nothing. As you sit in a café, you glance 
across the street and notice a bookshop that you rec-
ognize. You finish your coffee and make your way to 
the shop, intending to have another look to see if they 
have any rare tomes. You spend a while perusing the 
shelves and pay little heed as more customers enter 
the shop. Suddenly a glint of metal catches your eye 
and you realize that the customers in the shop are 
approaching you with curved daggers drawn! Glanc-
ing around you see the shopkeeper closing the blinds 
and turning the ‘Open’ sign to ‘Closed’. ”
Note that the players don’t get to act or interject 
until you allow them to, at which point the players 
are back in the story. As this scene is played out 
the Keeper makes every effort to yield sufficient 
information to the players to put them back on track. 
The players now know the shop is run by the cult.
The investigators visited a second-hand bookshop 
when researching a cult. They went to the shop be -
cause they found an occult tome with a bookmark on 
which was written the shop’s name. The investigators 
had hoped to find yet more tomes. Unknown to the 
players, the shop is run by the cult, and the investiga-
tors had seen the shopkeeper previously but failed to 
recognize him during their visit. The Keeper called 
for a Spot Hidden roll at the time to see if anyone 
recognized the shopkeeper, thinking that it might be 
interesting if the investigators didn’t recognize him. 
With the benefit of hindsight, this was an error. 
Now, two sessions later, the investigators have 
exhausted their leads and have requested an Idea Roll. 
The Keeper agrees, considers what lead to give them 
and decides that the second-hand bookshop offers a 
strong link to the plot, being a key location for the cult.
The players never spoke to or discussed the 
shopkeeper, even though the Keeper mentioned him a 
couple of times, so that calls for a Hard difficulty level. 
The player with the highest INT throws the dice and 
rolls under half their Idea score—a win.
The Keeper tells the players how the investigators 
sit together, going over all their research and clues. 
“You decide to check out all the previous leads 
again. Ten days later you find yourself (addressing a 
particular player) back in that bookshop on Charing 
Cross Road. Remember that? There are quite a few 
customers in there this time and one of them is 
chatting to the shopkeeper. You recognize him from 
when you spied on the cult meeting—he was there 
too! Fortunately he hasn’t spotted you and you can 
slip out unseen if you wish. ”
This will probably be enough to get the game 
moving again.
===== PDF page index 212 (rulebook p.212) =====
201 
chapter 10: playing the game
escapes performed within the rules (see Spending Luck , 
page 99).
If you have an important non-player character (especially 
in a campaign) who is likely to crop up numerous times, 
then you may provide that non-player character with a Luck 
pool equal to his or her POW . This can be spent to affect dice 
rolls, but the pool is not replenished—thus it might be used 
to cause mayhem and allow an escape, although eventually 
the non-player character’s luck will run dry.
One of the reasons for restricting the use of Luck for 
non-player characters is that many non-player characters will 
only appear once, and thus could easily spend all their luck 
there and then, making them very powerful during the short 
time that they are in play. Non-player characters who appear 
multiple times will have a reason to reserve their Luck.
Disseminating Information
Expect the players to investigate and ask questions. That 
statement may sound obvious; however, these investigations 
will lead the players to ask questions regarding matters you 
have not considered. If there has been a murder, for example, 
you need to have a clear vision of what has occurred at 
the scene. Y ou also need to decide how the murder took 
place. A player may ask if there are muddy footprints on 
the study carpet, whether there are any witnesses, or if the 
murder weapon has been thrown in the trash. If you have 
a good grasp of how events unfolded, you can provide a 
reliable answer, even to unanticipated questions. Y ou may 
not have considered a certain detail previously and hence 
don’t instantly know if there is mud on the study carpet, for 
example. Since you know how the murder took place, you 
will know if intruders broke in through the study window 
(which you can decide has a flowerbed outside), in which 
case there is indeed mud on the carpet!
When disseminating information, try to restrict yourself 
to describing evidence as found and leave it up to the players 
to deduce what has happened. Y ou might inform the players 
that there was mud on the carpet, but avoid explaining the 
reason for it. 
Leaving areas of doubt and uncertainty is essential to 
promoting a sense of intrigue among the players. Fear finds 
fertile ground in ignorance, uncertainty, and doubt. Just 
tell the players what their investigators perceive and let the 
players make their own deductions.
The investigators shoot a monster, avoid saying, “It’s 
dead” . Simply inform the players that they cannot perceive 
any signs of life. Now the players are uncertain—is the thing 
dead or alive? A First Aid or Medicine roll will determine 
whether a person is alive or dead for certain.
The investigators search a room and fail their Spot Hidden 
roll. Avoid saying, “There’s nothing there” . Tell the players they 
have not found anything. Now they are wondering if they 
missed something. Pushing the Spot Hidden roll would allow 
them to know if they have missed a clue or not.
The players will think of avenues of investigation that will 
surprise you. Be creative and try to incorporate their ideas and 
allow leads to manifest wherever it makes sense for them to 
do so. A player may think to look through the bookshelves of 
the study for a family tree; the text of the scenario may not list 
the presence of a family tree, but such a thing might be quite 
feasible, so reward this idea and build on it. Remember the 
principle of “Y es, and… ” and “Y es, but… ” .
Y es, and…: The family tree is inscribed inside a family 
bible along with some other useful hints.
Y es, but…: Y ou don’t want the players to discover the 
clue so easily, in which case, rather than simply not finding a 
family tree on the shelves, perhaps the investigator finds the 
family bible from which the first few pages have been torn 
out or certain names erased. 
Either of these options foster further investigation and 
are preferable to the simple blocking statement, “No, you 
can’t find a family tree. ”
Perception Rolls
There are three main perception skills in Call of Cthulhu:
i Spot Hidden: Chiefly visual observation, though it 
can also be used for smell or taste.
i Listen: Perceiving and identifying sounds.
i Psychology: Understanding the motivations and 
intentions of another person.
If a player succeeds in a roll for a perception skill, some 
information pertinent to the scenario should be forthcoming 
(referred to as a clue).
Flying polyps are very dangerous Mythos beings.
===== PDF page index 213 (rulebook p.213) =====
202 
Call of Cthulhu
The Keeper will usually be the one to ask for perception 
rolls, however sometimes a player may request one if his or 
her investigator is actively searching for a clue, for example 
exploring a room (Spot Hidden) or attempting to determine 
if someone is lying (Psychology). 
Avoid having a single concealed clue that is the key to 
the whole adventure—despite the Keeper’s best efforts, 
the players could miss it, especially in a scenario in which 
the location of the key clue may be bypassed. A variety of 
strategies exist. Y ou can ensure that important information 
is accessible in several ways. The information need not be 
precisely the same or appear in the same manner; however, 
it should be enough to point the investigators in the right 
direction. If ultimately they do miss the clue, don’t worry—
you always have the Idea roll (page 199) to fall back on. 
Clues are divided into two categories: obvious clues and 
obscure clues. Y ou decide which prior to the dice being rolled. 
Obvious Clues
If you have something you want the players to find out about, 
you should make the clue obvious. Obvious clues are useful 
if your game is plot-driven, especially when missing such a 
clue would leave the players at a loss for how to proceed. The 
players are not required to roll dice to uncover obvious clues. 
There may be obvious clues and obscured clues at the 
same location. It might be obvious that a book has been 
moved by the dust marks on the desk, but the single blonde 
hair lying in the dust might go unnoticed. The first piece of 
information—that the book was moved—is an obvious clue, 
while the blonde hair is an obscured clue.
If the clue is likely to be perceived by just one player among 
the group, it is up to you who you give it to; perhaps the player 
who has been least actively involved in the game, or the player 
of the investigator with the highest Spot Hidden score.
Obscured Clues
Finding an obscured clue may help the investigators in some 
way, but is not pivotal to progressing the plot. If you feel 
that either option, getting the clue or not getting the clue, 
would allow the game to proceed in an interesting direction, 
you can use an obscured clue. When the players request a 
perception roll, you should generally use an obscured clue.
Obscured clues serve two functions:
i The chance to gain useful information.
i To create tension when the players miss the roll and 
know they have missed a clue. 
The investigators are looking for a cultist in the town. 
The Keeper has prepared a cool scene that takes 
place in a haunted house; however, the players don’t 
know about it yet. The Keeper wants the investiga -
tors to recognize the skulking cultist and be led to the 
house. Treating this as an obvious clue, the Keeper 
tells Harvey’s player that her investigator spots a 
suspicious-looking man heading down a back alley. 
To everyone’s surprise, the player shouts out, “Stop 
that man!” and Harvey sprints off in pursuit before 
any of his fellow investigators can stop him. 
The main goal for investigators is to find out what is happening.
===== PDF page index 214 (rulebook p.214) =====
203 
chapter 10: playing the game
Resolving a Perception  
Roll For an Obscured Clue
Each investigator that could potentially perceive the clue 
should make a perception roll (Spot Hidden, Psychology, 
Listen, or a combination thereof). Decide on a difficulty 
level and declare it before the players roll. The information 
is given to the player with the highest level of success that 
meets or exceeds the difficulty level. In the case of a tie, the 
clue is perceived simultaneously by multiple investigators or 
by the investigator with the highest skill (Keeper’s choice).
Obscured perception rolls, when lost, have a second 
function—to provide a clear sign to the players that the 
investigators have missed a clue. Note that there is a dissonance 
here between player knowledge and investigator knowledge. 
The players know for certain there is a clue that has been missed, 
but the investigators should be unaware of anything they failed 
to perceive. The players now have three options, and which they 
choose is a matter of personal preference and style of play:
Ignore it: Play strictly within the bounds of the investigator’s 
knowledge.
Push it: Have an investigator act on a hunch and take action 
that justifies a pushed perception roll, actively using percep-
tion skills in an attempt to get the clue.
Act on it: The player may pre-emptively guess what the clue 
is and act on it, rather than risk the consequences of losing a 
pushed perception roll. Of course they may have leapt to the 
wrong conclusion.
Consequences of Losing  
a Pushed Perception Roll
Regardless of who called for the perception roll and why, the 
player may push the roll if it can be justified through the 
investigator’s actions. Perception rolls may be used in many 
different situations and there are many different potential 
consequences of losing a pushed roll. 
Here are a few ideas of what may go wrong when losing 
a pushed perception roll:
G The investigators waste time searching and in that 
time enemies arrive.
G Evidence of a search is left; items are broken or are 
replaced out of order.
G A foe creeps up to ambush the investigator while he 
or she is searching.
G The investigator causes offense or suspicion by 
studying the target too closely.
G That thing you were listening for? It heard you and it 
is coming!
Using More Than One Perception Skill 
Which skill to use for perception can be open to question, 
depending on the situation. If a non-player character is about 
to draw a weapon to attack an investigator, the player might 
make a Spot Hidden roll to see the weapon being drawn 
or a Psychology roll to become aware of the non-player 
character’s intention. In this case, allow the player to make 
one dice roll using the higher of the investigator’s two skills.
Player Goals For Perception Rolls
Usually the goal for a perception roll is simply “to find a 
clue”; however, a player may create a more specific goal, 
such as “I want to search the room. I’m hoping to find a 
diary or journal that will give some information regarding 
the whereabouts of the person we’re looking for. ” If you are 
happy that such a book could be found in the room, accept 
the goal and allow the player to roll the dice. If not, modify 
the goal accordingly or apply the “nothing there” technique 
outlined below.
The investigators have followed a cultist into an old 
house. The Keeper decides the cultist has hidden in 
the master bedroom and that he has left a blood 
trail—will the investigators notice it? The Keeper can 
foresee some interesting events happening either way; 
the players are set to explore the house anyway, and 
not getting the clue is not going to spoil anything. This 
information would give them an advantage, though, 
and the Keeper decides to treat it as an obscured clue,  
asking for Spot Hidden rolls with a difficulty level of 
Hard because the players are using only one flashlight 
between them. 
All the players miss the roll and they don’t see the 
blood trail. The tension is raised—the players know they 
have missed a clue. The investigators may choose to 
leave the house, or they may choose to spend more time 
searching, allowing the players to push the Spot Hidden 
roll. The consequences of missing the pushed roll could 
be that the investigators take damage from an ambush, 
or provide time for the cultist to make his escape.
Harvey is a guest of Lord Foxton, who has chosen 
to drug Harvey’s coffee. The Keeper wants to give 
Harvey a chance to notice this and offers a percep -
tion roll. The Keeper allows Harvey’s player to make 
a combined dice roll, comparing her rolled result to 
both Spot Hidden and Psychology. If the roll is made 
using Psychology, Harvey would pick up Lord Fox -
ton’s anxiety and sense that something is wrong. If it 
were made using Spot Hidden, Harvey would notice 
that his coffee smells a little strange.
===== PDF page index 215 (rulebook p.215) =====
204 
Call of Cthulhu
Nothing There?
Don’t be tempted to call for Perception rolls when there 
is nothing to find. Remember that the default goal of a 
Perception roll is always “to find a clue”—if there is no clue 
to find then there is no roll to be made. The clue, whatever 
it is, should be notable, something that adds an interesting 
new twist or aspect to the story. 
If a player requests a Spot Hidden roll, you may allow 
one even if there is no clue present. The goal should be 
phrased as “to look for a clue” or if looking for a specific 
item, perhaps “to look for Jefferson’s journal, ” for example. If 
the goal is achieved, the player will discover that the clue or 
item is definitely not present at the scene.
Psychology
If a player passes a Psychology roll, the truth should be 
revealed. If the roll is lost, you may be tempted to deceive the 
player, but if you automatically do this every time, the player 
(who knows because they lost the dice roll) will know that 
the opposite is true! Therefore, rather than feeling compelled 
to inform the player of the opposite of what is true, you are 
free to tell the player whatever you like—the difference being 
that the player won’t know if the information is reliable.
Handouts
Player handouts are a common feature of Call of Cthulhu  
games. These are usually given to the players when their 
investigators have found some important information, such 
as a letter or excerpt from a book. Published scenarios often 
reprint (or make available online) such handouts, allowing 
Keepers to print or cut them out for use in the game.
For example, a handwritten letter from an anonymous 
informer, a map showing the location of the tomb of an 
ancient wizard, or a newspaper article detailing sightings 
of the Sasquatch could each be presented to the players as 
handouts. 
Handouts serve several functions. One is sensory: 
a lovingly crafted handout helps to boost the sense of 
immersion in the story. Another is information. A handout 
is a convenient way to give out clues and information that 
can be retained by the players for later reference. A handout 
can also shift the focus from you and onto the person you 
hand it to. If the handout is for everyone then encourage the 
player to read it aloud.
Some Keepers prefer to create their handouts from 
scratch, whether for a published or a home-brew scenario. 
These can be works of art in themselves. Simple techniques 
can be used to great effect, such as writing letters with a 
fountain pen, or using an old, worn notebook, wherein the 
Keeper has prepared suitable pages. Coffee can be used to 
stain the paper to give a timeworn effect. A piece of clothing 
from a charity shop (like a glove or torn shirt) can be 
embellished with fake blood so that the Keeper can present 
it to the players when their investigators are searching the 
scene of some dark activity.
Photographs of the period in which the scenario is set 
can be useful in showing locations and people. Postcards 
from antique fairs might also be used. 
If the setting is more modern, the Keeper might prepare 
a sound file to be played when a recorded message is 
discovered, or perhaps a short video appropriate to the 
scenario. The possibilities are endless; whole “dummy” 
websites could be created for the purpose of a specific 
investigation.
Whether you have time to create such handouts from 
scratch, go searching for them or simply use the ones 
provided in published scenarios, the use of handouts greatly 
complements the game. Have fun and see what you can 
come up with.
Listen to what the players say and how they respond. 
If they are excited when you bring out a floor plan with 
counters or miniatures to map the action then do it more 
often. If they study every detail of each handout then use 
more of them. Usually you’ll have a mix of players and they 
will respond to a mix of approaches. Don’t sweat it; keep 
things in balance and just try to make a good game.
Using the Rules
The rules in this book are intended to be flexible enough to 
cope with every eventuality.
The rules, in brief, are:
Regardless of the situation, the player’s intention defines 
the goal, and a skill or characteristic is chosen that best suits 
the situation. 
If the situation is reliant upon on external circumstances 
rather than an investigator’s actions then a Luck roll is used.
A Guide to Using the Rules for  
Specific Situations
Here are some examples of goals and how a Keeper might 
use the rules to resolve them. These are not spot rules and 
are only provided as suggestions to help Keepers understand 
how skill rolls can be used with a variety of goals.
Winning at a casino: 
Most games at a casino are based on luck; however, the 
odds are always stacked in favor of the house, so a straight 
Harvey is showing a photo of his missing friend to the 
barman, “Have you seen this guy?” The Keeper tells 
how the barman glances at it then goes back to wiping 
a glass and stating, “Never seen him before in my life. ” 
Harvey’s player requests Psychology roll to tell if the 
barman is lying; she fails the roll. The Keeper smiles, 
“Well, he seems to be telling the truth. ”
Harvey’s player now feels sure that the barman 
is lying but she is not certain. Should she press the 
matter, perhaps offering a bribe or a threat? 
===== PDF page index 216 (rulebook p.216) =====
205 
chapter 10: playing the game
Luck roll would be generous. Perhaps this is one situation in 
which you could ask for a roll against half the investigator’s 
Luck score. A custom rule might be appropriate if you want 
to simulate the feeling of gambling. Y ou might decide to call 
for three Luck rolls over the course of the evening at the 
casino and set out the possible outcomes before rolling. Let 
the player nominate the stakes they are risking. If the player 
wins all three Luck rolls, he or she wins big, multiplying the 
stake by ten. If two out of three are achieved, the player wins 
a little. If one is achieved, the player breaks even. If all three 
are lost, the player ends up deep in debt. 
Ambushing an opponent: 
The investigator wants to gain concealment and attack with 
an advantage. If the investigator makes a winning Stealth 
skill roll (opposed by the enemy’s Spot Hidden skill) you 
might grant a bonus die to the player’s first attack, or simply 
allow an automatic success.
Swimming to safety (drowning): 
An investigator has fallen into turbulent water and must swim 
to safety or drown. The Keeper calls for a swim roll with the goal 
“swim to safety. ” If the player loses, then no progress is made 
and water may be inhaled; the player must make a CON roll or 
his or her investigator will suffer 1D6 damage per round (see 
Other Forms of Damage, page 124). The situation demands a 
pushed roll—the only alternative is that the investigator gives 
up and drowns. If the player misses the pushed swim roll, the 
investigator is battered and half-drowned, taking 1D6 damage 
per round. The Keeper must then make an important decision: 
either the investigator’s life is put on the line or the investigator 
is washed up later elsewhere. If the Keeper chooses the former, 
then the investigator will continue to lose hit points each round 
until saved by another investigator or non-player character. 
Alternatively, if no one else is around, the Keeper could waive 
the drowning damage and instead have the unsuccessful pushed 
roll mean that the investigator has washed up on some foreign 
shore, bereft of all possessions and in a bad way.
Strangling an enemy:
First the attacker would use a Fighting Maneuver with the 
aim of “seizing my victim in a stranglehold” . The standard 
combat rules accommodate this. After completing the 
maneuver, on each successive round the attacker (who is 
now acting with one bonus die as a result of the successful 
fighting maneuver) may strangle the target using the Fighting 
skill to make attacks as normal; any damage is narrated as 
strangulation. Note how this uses standard combat rules.
House Rules
If you wish to create a custom or house rule for specific 
circumstances, think carefully before doing so.
Are you sure that what you want to do would not be 
handled equally well using the standard rules? Is a custom 
rule going to add significantly to the game? 
The game includes specific rules for combat, chases, 
magic, luck, sanity, and physical harm. Everything else is 
handled with skill rolls. For example, no specific rules are 
included for how long a person can survive without food and 
water or how long it takes to hack into a computer network. 
These things can be decided by the Keeper as appropriate to 
the current scenario, using the standard rules and personal 
judgment. However, if one of these is a key element in a 
particular scenario, then it might be appropriate to come up 
with custom rules that specifically focus on that aspect. 
When making a custom rule, try to keep it simple—focus 
on one skill or a limited number of skills (or characteristics) 
and decide on a method of tracking degrees of success. Try 
to build in meaningful decisions that can be taken by the 
players; such things might alter the difficulty level or change 
which skill is used.
Of course, the rulebook could attempt to list a specific 
rule for every eventuality, but this leads to a game in which the 
rules must constantly be referred to and in which everyone 
is restrained by a rule on every action. Call of Cthulhu  is 
designed to be flexible and to encourage the Keeper to make 
creative use of the core rule: the skill roll.
Characteristic Rolls 
The standard rules present a method of generating 
characteristics and creating an investigator. A variety of 
alternative approaches are presented in Chapter 3: Creating 
Investigators. Players expect consistency. If you allow one 
player to re-roll or juggle characteristics, you should be up 
front about it and apply the same approach for all players.
Action Scenes
Scenes involving multiple investigators, non-player 
characters and/or monsters can become confusing, 
especially when trying to figure out who is doing what and 
when. To maintain control, you should quickly establish a 
list of investigators and non-player characters in DEX order. 
You are writing a scenario that begins with the 
investigators lost in a desert, with limited food and 
water. The aim is to design a rule that will empha -
size the effects of deprivation and fatigue. Being in 
the desert will lead to dehydration, disorientation, 
starvation, sunburn, and fatigue. You decide that the 
key characteristic relating to this is CON. Ultimately, 
being lost in the desert will lead to death, so hit points 
will be used to track failure. The players will be asked 
to make a CON roll for each day of game time that 
passes—if a player fails the roll, their investigator will 
take 1D3 damage. Normally this would heal, but you 
decide that no healing is permitted due to the severe 
conditions. An investigator’s hit points might fall to 
zero over the course of a few days, at which time he 
or she would be unconscious and facing imminent 
death. The “new” rule fits with the intention and you 
institute this as a custom rule for use in that scenario.
===== PDF page index 217 (rulebook p.217) =====
206 
Call of Cthulhu
Start with the highest DEX (at the top of the list) and resolve 
that character’s action, then work down the list in turn. The 
round is over when everyone has had their turn; go back to 
the top of the list and start over until the situation or scene 
is resolved. 
Some actions take longer to perform than others. 
Sometimes the rules define how long it may take to perform 
a particular action, such as with combat attacks and spells, 
but for other actions you will have to make a judgment. 
“But That’s How it Works in Reality”
When using your judgment over what might happen in the 
game, try to balance a sense of reality with what you think 
will create a dramatic situation—if it’s clear that being a 
slave to verisimilitude is going to produce a dull outcome 
then try being more creative. This is not to imply that you 
should strive to be unrealistic; however, if you find yourself 
justifying a universally undesirable event with the phrase, 
“But that’s how it works in reality, ” you should ask yourself 
if you couldn’t do something more dramatically creative. A 
shotgun blast, for example, may not send a person flying 
back through the air in reality, but if you like the idea of it 
doing so then where’s the harm?
Movement
All distances are approximate and based on narrative 
description, so accurate measurement will rarely be an 
issue. Should you wish to gauge distances then, as a rough 
guide, a character can cautiously travel one meter or yard 
per movement point (MOV) in one combat round; thus an 
average human can travel 8 meters in one combat round. If 
sprinting, a character might cover five times that distance, 
but would soon tire.
Hit Points and Physical Injury  
for Non-Player Characters
Y ou should use the standard damage rules for non-player 
characters. However, non-player characters are under your 
control. If you decide that a non-player character has a 
heart attack and drops dead on the spot then that is what 
happens, so it follows that if an investigator punches a 
non-player character, and you decide that the non-player 
character drops dead as a result of the attack, then that is 
what happens. Y ou don’t even have to ask for a roll to hit or 
a damage roll on a non-player character if you do not wish 
to. If an investigator has a non-player character at his or 
her mercy (perhaps a knife held to their throat) and states 
that he or she is killing the non-player character then allow 
this to happen without using dice if you wish. This would of 
course be exceptional; however, it illustrates the point that 
you are only compelled to apply the rules when they directly 
affect an investigator. Y ou can have a ceiling fall and crush a 
non-player character without a roll, but an investigator will 
always get a dice roll—in this case, perhaps to dodge falling 
masonry or to notice the loose ceiling before it falls.
Players may assess a non-player character’s injuries 
by tracking the damage they inflict or simply by what the 
investigators perceive, although these may not be wholly 
reliable, as a non-player character might have magical 
defense or may only be pretending to be injured. When a 
successful First Aid or Medicine roll is performed on a non-
player character, you should indicate to the player whether 
the non-player character is dying, dead, or alive. 
The investigators may reduce an enemy to 
unconsciousness—a condition from which the enemy will 
most likely recover, given time. This may provide a moral 
dilemma—do the investigators allow an evil cultist to live 
or do they carry out a summary execution? In most cases, 
cold-blooded murder should incur a Sanity roll.
Chases
The task of describing a location is usually part of the 
Keeper’s role; in a chase, however, when the player wins a 
Luck roll, he or she is encouraged to do so. Some players may 
be hesitant to do this, in which case you should ask leading 
questions and encourage the player to elaborate.
Harvey is running along a street, pursued by an 
enraged gang. The Keeper has no plans for the sur -
rounding area and decides to throw it open to chance. 
Harvey’s player wins a Luck roll and gets to define the 
next few locations. Harvey’s player looks a little blank. 
“OK, so you’re running up the street, it’s crowded 
with evening shoppers and people heading home 
from work. You’ve passed your Dodge roll and weave 
through the crowd with ease. There are alleys to the 
left and right, some shops are still open, where are you 
heading?” the Keeper asks.
“Um, I’ll head for a side alley. ”
“Great. What’s the alley like? Is it clear or are 
there any obstacles such as trashcans? Is there anyone 
in the alley?” the Keeper prompts the player.
“There’s a garbage truck and men emptying 
trashcans into it, ” the player states.
“So you’re going to have to dodge around them?”
The Keeper sums up what the player has said and 
defines the location clearly, writing it on the sheet. 
“So the next Location is an alley, partially blocked by 
a garbage truck and workers. The alley features one 
hazard requiring a Dodge roll. ”
Ricardo Moore attempts to pick a lock while his com-
panions protect his back from marauding cultists. 
The Keeper rules that it will take 3 combat rounds to 
pick the lock—more if the roll is pushed.

===== PDF page index 218 (rulebook p.218) =====
207 
chapter 10: playing the game
Presenting the  
Terrors of the Mythos
In Chapter 14: Monsters, Beasts and Alien Gods , each 
monster has a description (usually taken directly from 
a Mythos story). These are a great place to start, but you 
should try to build upon these and vary your descriptions so 
that recurring monsters do not become mundane. 
Using images to present the horrors of the Cthulhu 
Mythos can be problematic. While the Internet and books 
can sometimes provide approximations of some of the 
monsters of the Mythos, they are not always ideal, and 
sometimes detract from the sense of horror that you as 
Keeper are trying to portray. Likewise, popping a miniature 
figure of an elder thing onto the gaming table is more likely 
to have the effect of breaking any tension you have built thus 
far (such miniatures can be useful later on, once you have 
fully set the scene and engaged the players with a sense of 
dread or horror).
As many film directors know, the motto “less is more” is 
a useful one to remember when presenting mind-blasting 
entities from beyond space and time. Try describing 
monsters vaguely, hinting at their otherworldliness and 
letting each player’s imagination fill in the blanks. 
Each time you present a monster, present it afresh. Make 
the description intense and visceral. A deep one is never just a 
deep one. It is always a creature from the depths of the sea and 
old as time itself, a creature whose very presence hits you deep 
in the gut, repelling mankind in a profound manner causing 
revulsion and nausea. Remember, it is never just a deep one.
Playing Alien Entities
Then, too, there was the upsetting of the larder, the 
disappearance of certain staples, and the jarringly comical 
heap of tin cans pried open in the most unlikely ways and at 
the most unlikely places. The profusion of scattered matches, 
intact, broken, or spent, formed another minor enigma—as did 
the two or three tent cloths and fur suits which we found lying 
about with peculiar and unorthodox slashings conceivably due 
to clumsy efforts at unimaginable adaptations. 
—H.P . Lovecraft, At the Mountains of Madness
Only the Keeper knows how the creatures of the Mythos 
should behave. Anything they do may be important. They 
are capable of influencing investigators in all sorts of ways. In 
too many games, monsters just turn up, growl or pipe in an 
eldritch tone and then attack. This presentation is limiting, 
predictable, and unworthy of the Mythos.
Intelligent creatures build, experiment, worship, learn, 
perform magic, question, torture, or do anything else 
humans might do. They do much more as well; things that 
are odd, inexplicable, or incomprehensible. 
The horror, mystery and tone of the game are best served 
if behaviors are dark and unusual. The actions of such 
creatures are beyond the imagination and you should strive 
to portray them as sinister, threatening, and unwholesome. 
The easy identification of a monster takes away mystery 
and reveals details about the plot. Don’t let investigators get 
information for free. If they get closer to the thing, it is still 
not a deep one—it is a dark, wet shape, half-submerged, 
draped with seaweed, stinking like long-dead fish.
When monsters die, it is up to you whether they exhibit 
symptoms of distress, simply collapse, or vanish. Mythos 
creatures that die often dissolve or evaporate—the noxious 
cloud soon replaced by a damp spot and clean air, as 
happened to Wilbur Whateley in Miskatonic University’s 
library in The Dunwich Horror. This conveniently leaves the 
investigators short of physical evidence. 
Descriptions need not be entirely visual and become 
more real if two or more senses can be employed, such as 
sight and smell. Did the monster leave a trail of noxious 
slime behind? Describe its texture. Does it expel disagreeable 
odors? Does it emit a strange, high-pitched wail as the slime 
dissolves? Don’t strain for effect or break off the narrative to 
try to come up with the right word, but keep in mind texture, 
smell, taste, and quality of light as possible factors. 
Smell is particularly evocative, perhaps because it 
cannot be communicated by second-hand stimuli such 
as photographs, radio, or television; we know a thing is 
physically present with us when we can smell it. Sometimes 
the mere proximity of a Mythos monster can make the hairs 
on the investigator’s neck stand up. 
The evidence that a creature leaves behind—pools, prints, 
fragments, flakes, etc.—or the damage it has done, provide a 
much more interesting way to lead to the deduction of its 
identity or purpose. Sets of clues that add up to a baffling 
monster can make for fascinating play.
Take this description of a hound of Tindalos:
“Out of the room’s corner jumps a hound of 
Tindalos. It’s going to attack you... ”
Perhaps we can do a little better:
“You see a strange-looking dog appear from the 
corner of the room. Its eyes are yellow and its skin a 
pale blue color. It snarls evilly at you, rises on its hind 
legs and leaps towards you... ”
Or how about this:
“ As you look about the room, a foul stench fills 
your nostrils. You find yourself choking on the fetid 
air. Your eyes turn irresistibly towards the northeast 
corner as a sickly yellow light appears to leech from the 
walls. The light grows in intensity, burning your eyes. 
It’s difficult to make out, but you begin to see a dark 
shape emerge from the corner, out of the repulsive 
yellow light. The hairs on the back of your neck stand 
up as you realize something bad is approaching. You 
hear a terrible, inhuman snarl and you see a pair of 
jaws open, revealing lines of razor-sharp teeth... ”
By setting the tone and using appropriate 
description, the player’s imagination will do the rest.
===== PDF page index 219 (rulebook p.219) =====
208 
Call of Cthulhu
Remember that nearly all Mythos races, such as mi-go, 
serpent men, and deep ones, are of human intelligence or higher, 
lead longer lives and are more knowledgeable of the world and 
cosmos around them. Who among these semi-immortals 
would willingly risk death for some momentary victory over 
beings who are to them the equivalent of chimpanzees? Lacking 
reasons to fight, intelligent creatures retreat before danger. 
Avoid negotiation between investigators and their inhuman 
adversaries—such actions suggest that the monsters operate on 
a human level and diminishes their horror.
Shoggoths and other entities of lesser intelligence should 
be terrifyingly unpredictable and rancorous. Such creatures 
may well launch all-out attacks and can be terrible in their 
wrath. Here the challenge is physical and the Keeper is 
obliged only to give reasonable warning of impending 
doom. Attacking the shoggoth who lives in the cave can 
be an episodic problem, one that can be returned to until 
the investigators can destroy it—should they survive long 
enough—seal it in, or somehow banish it elsewhere.
Looking Away Won’t Save You!
And as I watched the ripples that told of the writhing of 
worms beneath, I felt a new chill from afar out whither the 
condor had flown, as if my flesh had caught a horror before 
my eyes had seen it.
—H.P . Lovecraft, What the Moon Brings.
This quote illustrates how we perceive with all of our senses, 
not just our eyes. Given the alien nature of the Mythos, we 
might even perceive its presence through some primal sense 
beyond the known five that we recognize. Averting one’s eyes 
from the TV screen may shield us from the sight of unwanted 
scenes of horror, but this is rarely enough when confronted 
with the tangible, unspeakable presence of a Mythos monster. 
Winners and Losers
Call of Cthulhu  is not a competition between you and the 
players. The rules ensure that everyone is treated fairly; 
however, there is no mechanism to enforce game balance 
between the Keeper and the players. Balance is derived from 
the decisions that you make as Keeper. Y ou decide what the 
investigators encounter, you set the scene, you decide on the 
actions of the non-player characters. 
Sometimes, a monster looks the same whether or not it is alive. Use caution when confirming kills.

===== PDF page index 220 (rulebook p.220) =====
209 
chapter 10: playing the game
The odds can easily be stacked against the players. There 
are no rules to limit what you can present the investigators 
with; if you decide that a host of dark young descend on the 
investigators while they are asleep, then there is little that 
the players can do to save their investigators. This would not 
make for a good game nor happy players. Y ou must measure 
the threat and be aware that many of the monsters presented 
in this book are capable of wiping out a party of investigators. 
Usually, the best option open to the investigators is to flee 
and live to fight another day.
Fair Warning
Keepers should endeavor to provide players with the chance 
to avoid investigator death wherever possible. This is not to 
say that Keepers should diminish the abilities of monsters 
and villains in the game, or pull their punches when dealing 
out damage from attacks and other injuries. Rather, it is 
recommended that Keepers give players up to three chances 
to avoid certain death.
Failed Sanity Rolls
A sense of self-control is an essential quality of sanity. A non-
player character may hold a gun to an investigator’s head and 
demand information regarding a missing segment of the 
R’lyeh Disk, but whether the investigator tells or accepts a 
bullet in the head is up to the player. However, when a Sanity 
roll is failed, the investigator loses all self-control and may 
act in a way that is counter to his or her best interests. 
People who lose control may harm themselves or others, 
even loved ones, or act in some other way that is counter to 
how they would act when rational. To simulate this loss of 
self-control, the investigator is handed to you, the Keeper, 
for a short time—whenever a Sanity roll is failed you take 
control and dictate the investigator’s next action. As always, 
you should aim to drive the game towards the theme of 
horror and consider how an involuntary action could do 
this. For example, if the investigators are hiding under a bed 
when the cannibal cult arrive home, will one of them cry out 
upon missing a Sanity roll as a result of seeing the cultists 
preparing their lunch?
If the Sanity roll results in insanity, the Keeper gains 
control of the investigator’s actions for the duration of the 
bout of madness. This won’t be for long—in real time at 
least. Once the bout of madness is over, control of the 
investigator is handed back to the player. Note the difference 
between madness, which is of short duration, and the 
underlying insanity, which is longer—the Keeper controls 
the investigator during madness, the player controls during 
insanity.
Players may take a cue from their investigator going 
insane to present their character as "mad" all of the time—
while they can portray their character however they wish, you 
may want to remind such players that being insane does not 
necessarily mean that the character acts out their madness 
all of the time. Indeed, while there is an underlying insanity, 
the investigator may act and function completely normally 
The investigators have closed in on the hideout of the Cult 
of the Whispering Tongue and are currently searching the 
secret base for leads on the cult’s plans to unleash devasta-
tion on New York City. What the investigators don’t know 
is that the cult has a shoggoth living in an underground 
pool. The shoggoth is powerful and very likely to kill some, 
if not all, of the investigators if they blunder into it—such 
an outcome will most likely mean the premature end of 
the game. Therefore, the Keeper provides the players with 
three chances to avoid confronting the shoggoth.
The first chance comes when the Keeper discusses the 
players’ plans for searching the hideout. The players are 
excited and it appears they want to rush in, abandoning 
any sense of caution. During the conversation, the Keeper 
rephrases what the players are saying as, “So you think the 
murderous Cult of the Whispering Tongue are hiding out 
here and you want to rush in with guns blazing, with no 
evidence that this in indeed the right place?” Hopefully, 
something along these lines will give the players enough 
of a hint that a degree of caution might be advisable. 
Perhaps they should stake out the place first to gather 
more information about the cult’s activities.
Having watched the hideout for a couple of days, the 
players have recognized some of the cultists and are now 
certain that they have the right place. The investigators 
quietly gain entry and are searching the many rooms of the 
building when they come upon a lone cultist. After a quick 
fight, the cultist is captured, and the investigators decide 
to question him before going any further. The Keeper uses 
this opportunity to give a second hint that the players really 
should avoid entering the cave under the cellar. When the 
players ask the captured cultist what is in the cellar, the 
Keeper replies in the voice of the cultist “Go in the cellar, 
eh? That’s a good idea. Yes, you go down there and find 
the pool! You’ll get just what’s coming to you down there! 
Ha Ha HA!!” The Keeper presents the cultists as mad and 
dangerous, hoping that the players will pick up on the fact 
that whatever is in the pool in the cellar is dangerous.
Ignoring the Keeper’s hints so far, the players tie up 
the cultist and leave him hidden in a closet, and decide to 
go straight to the cellar to check out the pool (no one said 
that the players will listen to the Keeper!). As they explore 
the cellar, one of them discovers stone steps leading down 
to a large hole in the floor. As the investigators look 
down the steps, the Keeper provides a third and final 
warning, “The stone steps look slimy and there’s a foul 
smell—something evil dwells down there. You can hear 
the water splash, like something huge was climbing out 
of a pool. A hideous popping sound carries up the stairs. 
Whatever’s down there doesn’t smell or sound good. ”
Whatever the players decide to do next is up to them, 
but the Keeper has now given them three warnings that this 
isn’t going to be a walk in the park. Hopefully the players 
are at least prepared and forearmed now—if they have any 
sense they’ll run rather than try to fight the shoggoth!
===== PDF page index 221 (rulebook p.221) =====
210 
Call of Cthulhu

===== PDF page index 222 (rulebook p.222) =====
211 
chapter 10: playing the game
in everyday situations, however if they suffer further Sanity 
point loss, then a bout of madness ensues and the character’s 
madness takes hold for the duration of the bout.
Ultimately with the onset of permanent insanity (which 
equates with permanent madness) the player’s control of his 
or her investigator comes to an end.
One way to think of Call of Cthulhu  is as a struggle 
between player and Keeper for control of the investigator. 
The player takes the side of rational and sane behavior, while 
you, the Keeper, are like a little devil on the investigator’s 
shoulder, constantly pushing the investigator into situations 
that will lead to your gaining control, resulting in madness 
and irrational behavior.
Delusions
Delusions have greater impact if the delusion has some 
relevance to the investigator. A great way to do this is to keep 
track of each investigator’s backstory and use the entries 
as inspiration for delusions. A lone investigator might set 
out to explore some old house, only to meet an old friend 
there (from his or her backstory). The whole event may be a 
delusion taking place in the investigator’s home. 
A number of films offer good inspiration for how to use 
delusions and madness, among them Twelve Monkeys, Bug, 
The Shining, The Lovely Bones, Pan’s Labyrinth, Fight Club  
and Mulholland Drive. In these movies, characters struggle to 
differentiate between reality and hallucinations, and we, the 
viewer, are unsure if what we are seeing is real or imaginary.
Scaring the Players
“What would your feelings be, seriously, if your cat or your 
dog began to talk to you, and to dispute with you in human 
accents? You would be overwhelmed with horror. I am sure 
of it. And if the roses in your garden sang a weird song, you 
would go mad. And suppose the stones in the road began to 
swell and grow before your eyes, and if the pebble that you 
noticed at night had shot out stony blossoms in the morning?”
—Arthur Machen, The White People
The horror genre can be a lot of fun. Right down to pounding 
hearts and sweating brows, it is part of human nature to find 
pleasure in being scared, as long as being scared is not for 
real. Of course, actually scaring anyone is rare in a game 
consisting of dice and paper, but be assured it can happen. 
The game’s setting is ostensibly that of the real world 
with which we are intimately familiar. As you play, strive to 
make the world realistic so your players feel at home in it. If 
a monster appeared in real life, most of us would be scared, 
but a player is unlikely to be scared even if a monster enters 
through his or her investigator’s front door—the player knows 
this is a horror game, and is expecting monsters. Instead 
of using a monster to scare a player, try to confound the 
player’s expectations of how things in the “real” world work. 
Consider the following event for example: the investigator 
says goodbye to his wife as she leaves the house for work, 
and then, five minutes later, his wife walks down the stairs in 
her dressing gown. Don’t provide an explanation. If you can 
induce cognitive dissonance (holding two conflicting ideas 
simultaneously) in the player, you will open the door to fear 
as the player’s mind struggles to make sense of the situation. 
We get scared when we can’t make sense of things, especially 
when those things that don’t make sense are the mundane, 
everyday things that we know we should understand. 
Pacing works hand-in-hand with confounding 
expectations to create a sense of escalating tension and 
terror. Present the players with problems and, when the 
player shows signs of coping with the problems, toss in 
an additional complication. Look through your scenario, 
consider the problems that will arise for the investigators 
and be on the lookout for more as you play. 
Magic
Magic is part of the Cthulhu Mythos and man can never 
fully comprehend it. Each spell has its own description 
listed in Chapter 12: Grimoire ; however, spells are in the 
Keeper’s domain and therefore mutable. Y ou are free to 
change any aspect of a spell as you wish. Consistency is 
antithetical to the horror genre—Lovecraft himself never 
constrained himself with it, so neither should you. Once 
a spell or monster is established in a given story, you will 
probably want to keep it largely unchanged for the duration 
of that story, but this does not mean that in another story 
with different investigators the same monster or spell cannot 
manifest in a quite different way. 
Harvey has discovered that a cult is operating in the 
local town (problem 1). Investigations lead him to 
discover that they are planning something horrible 
for the town fair tomorrow night (problem 2)! As 
his investigations proceed, he unearths evidence 
that Uncle Theodore is involved with the cult—is the 
information really true (problem 3)?
Harvey is desperate and seeks the help of an old 
friend, Matthias Nixon, who is learned in magic. 
Unbeknownst to Harvey, Nixon is in a state of transition, 
becoming a ghoul. Nixon offers Harvey a bargain: he 
will help Harvey, but in return Harvey must supply him 
with a fresh human corpse (problem 4). 
Harvey’s problems are piling up and the clock is 
ticking.
The spell Wave of Oblivion (page 265) requires a body 
of salt water to be present for the spell to work and 
describes its effect as a mighty ocean wave crashing 
down upon the target. There’s no reason why this 
couldn’t instead be a wave of invisible force or a wind 
so strong it tears flesh from the bone.
===== PDF page index 223 (rulebook p.223) =====
212 
Call of Cthulhu
As well as the danger associated with the first casting of a 
spell, you are encouraged to incorporate your own ideas for 
hazards for the spells, perhaps to suit your scenario. 
Tomes
Y ou should note that the rules state that it is up to you when 
to call for rolls, and this applies equally to reading tomes 
and using magic. If reading the tome is essential to the 
progression of your plot, then beware of introducing a dice 
roll and thus a risk of failure.
Using the Optional Rule: Spontaneous 
Use of the Cthulhu Mythos Skill
Clearly, use of this option must be handled with care, as it 
can potentially place disproportionate power in the hands of 
a player. When an investigator has only 2% Cthulhu Mythos 
skill, the chances of successfully using spontaneous magic 
are very low. Y ou may be tempted by this low probability of 
success to allow an investigator a chance to achieve a major 
goal, such as raising the dead through spontaneous use of 
the Cthulhu Mythos skill. This may become an issue when 
that same investigator has 50% Cthulhu Mythos skill in the 
future; suddenly what was a rare chance becomes a fifty-fifty 
chance and the investigator is casually raising the dead on a 
daily basis. Only you can decide what is appropriate to your 
game, so take care not to allow overly generous goals simply 
because the present chance of success is very low. Opting to 
downscale an investigator’s abilities later will give the players 
a sense of being penalized and should be avoided by using 
some forethought.
When setting goals for the use of Cthulhu Mythos 
skill, refer to a comparable spell for guidance on costs and 
requirements. Tell the player how many magic points it will 
cost when the goal is agreed, or perhaps state a die type 
(e.g. 1D8) that will be rolled to determine the magic point 
cost. Each spontaneous use of Cthulhu Mythos should be 
dangerous and unique; losing the pushed roll can have dire 
consequences (see Failing a Pushed Casting Roll, page 178).
Y ou may decide to be more generous in the setting of 
goals for the use of the spontaneous Cthulhu Mythos skill 
if the goal is associated with the investigator’s profession. 
In this way a doctor could become a Herbert West-style 
character—a mad doctor bent on the reanimation of dead 
tissue.
Entering the World of the Cthulhu Mythos
In creating atmosphere, the Keeper should play up the 
transition that the investigators go through when they 
come to realize the reality of the Mythos. For someone 
with no Cthulhu Mythos skill points or who disbelieves 
in it (see Becoming a Believer , page 179), the world is a 
place of hope, a place where mankind has the potential to 
live in happiness, a place where the investigator can look 
forward to settling down, starting a family and enjoying 
a long and happy life. However, for those who take the 
irrevocable step and comprehend the true nature of the 
universe, that optimistic light is extinguished forever. 
When one becomes a believer, the world changes and 
becomes a threatening and unpleasant place—people look 
strange and threatening, and the wind blows cold. There 
are no more tranquil places, only places of dread. The once 
great achievements of mankind are now seen as shallow 
mockeries. Where once cheery faces gathered to welcome 
the investigator, now there are only lurking figures whose 
eyes are filled with malice and resentment. Those with 
knowledge of the Mythos face a worse fate than most. As 
their sanity is drained away, the nightmares increase, until 
they perceive the horror even with their waking mind. When 
all sanity is gone, as their mind snaps, they hear it clearly, but 
for a moment:  the dreadful Call of Cthulhu.
Ending a Story
Everyone likes a good ending, but what constitutes a good 
ending? Consider films: some end with a bang ( Star Wars), 
others end at a crucial point ( The Italian Job ) and some 
simply stop mid-flow (No Country for Old Men).
Potentially, a game could continue on and on, but as 
Keeper you should know when the story comes to an end. 
Sometimes the ending is obvious, other times it is a matter of 
deciding when to say, “cut” . If the investigators defeat the big 
bad in a battle, this clearly presents one way to end the game. 
Other times an ending may not be so clear. 
If you’ve been playing for several hours and want to draw 
the session to a close, you have a couple of options. Ask the 
players if they want to continue the story another day. If so, 
try to bring the game to a cliffhanger or dramatic moment 
and then cease play. If people want to end the game then 
fast-forward to the final scene. An Idea roll (page 199) may 
be useful here to decide whether the investigators begin 
the final scene in an advantageous position or not. Tell the 
players what they find out and where it takes them, and then 
kick off the final scene in medias res. The movie Planet Terror 
(a.k.a. Grindhouse) illustrates this approach wonderfully: 
simulating the outdated problem of having a missing reel of 
film, the movie jumps to a later scene of carnage with the 
protagonists in the thick of the action.
Investigator Death
In some instances, death (even death of the whole investigator 
group) can be a dramatic and memorable outcome. But the 
death of an investigator knocks a player out of the game 
until such a time that a new investigator can be created and 
introduced to the story. Don’t be too ready to deal out death 
if other interesting options are possible. Endeavoring to 
make the game an enjoyable experience for everyone is far 
more important than being a slave to realism. 
Remember, this is a horror game, and the threat of both 
death and insanity should accompany the investigators’ 
every step. An investigator is controlled by a player and there 
are only two outcomes that permanently end this: death and 
permanent insanity. 

===== PDF page index 224 (rulebook p.224) =====
213 
chapter 10: playing the game
Y ou may be tempted towards leniency when it comes 
to dealing out damage, but be mindful that in most cases 
accumulated damage leads to unconsciousness rather than 
death. Players are encouraged to form an attachment to 
their investigators and the death of an investigator should 
always be a significant event. Don’t be surprised if a player 
welcomes the death of an investigator, especially if the death 
is heroic, meaningful, or will simply make a great anecdote!
Epilogues
A short epilogue for each investigator is a nice way to wrap 
up the end of a story. A brief epilogue can be used to tell 
what becomes of each investigator in the aftermath of the 
story, and provides an opportunity to recognize every 
player’s contribution to the game. Go around the group and 
talk to each player in turn about the fate of their investigator. 
There’s no need for dice rolls, just a brief description of 
what the future holds. Try to make each epilogue suitably 
Lovecraftian and appropriate to your story.
Creating Scenarios
This section looks at the basic ingredients of a Call of Cthulhu 
adventure, aiming to help you take your first steps in crafting 
scenarios for a group of intrepid investigators.
There is no one single approach to creating a scenario 
any more than there is one way to write a book or compose 
a song. Here is a selection of starting points.
Start with setting details  
and build a story from the ground up
Picking the 1969 Woodstock Festival as the setting, the 
Keeper sets about researching the period, people involved, 
etc., and uses it as inspiration for a plot. 
Start with a mysterious event
Rather than starting with a general setting, pick a more 
mysterious or unexplained event and build a scenario based 
upon it; for example the Tunguska event of 1908 in Russia.
Devise an alternate history
Pick a turning point in history and ask what would have 
happened if things had gone differently; what if Hitler had 
used Mythos magic to win the war?
Pick a monster or god
Use a Mythos entity as inspiration for a scenario; picking 
“fire vampire” gives a theme of fire, for example. They may 
be summoned to attack people and are linked with the god 
Cthugha. Who might worship such a god, who might want 
to summon fire vampires and why?
Create a cult
In Lovecraft’s stories, many beings of the Mythos are too powerful 
to be defeated by human opponents and so horrific that direct 
knowledge of them causes insanity. When dealing with such 
beings, Lovecraft needed a way to provide exposition and build 
tension without bringing the story to a premature end. Human 
followers gave him a way to reveal information about their "gods" 
in a diluted form and made it possible for his protagonists to win 
paltry victories. If the investigators are going up against powerful 
Mythos entities every week, it won’t be long before they are all 
dead. Using human cultists, worshippers, mad scientists, and 
other suitably nefarious characters will provide not only more 
evenly matched opponents but also variety in your games.
Survival horror
The most basic of human motivations is survival. What 
clearer theme can there be than fighting for one’s life? 
Survival horror is popular horror sub-genre and can work 
well for scenarios in which the investigators are thrown 
head-first into a threatening situation and are forced to act 
to survive.
Isolation
Remember, the onus must be on the investigators. It is they 
who should feel compelled to deal with the situation rather 
than calling on external help, such as the police. Sometimes 
the isolation of remote places can be complete, where the 
investigators are miles away from society and lack the ability 
to call for help. In other situations they may be isolated of 
their own volition; perhaps the investigators are wanted for a 
crime and are forced to isolate themselves to avoid arrest and 
imprisonment. In such situations the investigators must work 
on the fringes of society, outside of the protection of the law.
Pick a story
Seek inspiration from a Lovecraft story or perhaps something 
else, such as a film or television show. Make alterations to it, 
perhaps stripping it down to its essential parts then building 
it up in a new and interesting way. For example, take The 
Shadow over Innsmouth and place it in a lush forested area, 
Things don’t go well for a group of three investigators 
playing Amidst the Ancient Trees . Two investiga -
tors  are dead and the remaining survivor has fled 
into the forest after a sanity breaking encounter with 
the monster in the lake. The Keeper could just end it 
there, but it feels a little abrupt. Instead the Keeper 
suggests a brief epilogue and looks to the player of 
the surviving investigator. “What becomes of you?” 
The player suggests that the investigator returns 
to town ranting about the "Thing in the lake." The 
Keeper wraps things up: “Very well, the townsfolk 
don't believe your tales of watery monsters. Despite a 
search of the lake, no evidence is found to substanti-
ate your story. You find that it's easier to hit the bottle 
and forget your horrific experience, but each night 
bad dreams haunt you. Eventually, consumed with a 
desire to break-free of this curse, you head towards 
the lake, a box of dynamite in your hands...

===== PDF page index 225 (rulebook p.225) =====
214 
Call of Cthulhu
replacing deep ones with monster-human hybrids who 
worship Shub-Niggurath.
Begin with a compelling opening scene
The investigators begin aboard a bus. Looking out of the 
window they see a man, apparently a vagrant, screaming at 
the pigeons. All of a sudden a rip appears in the fabric of 
space and things begin to spew forth. Perhaps this man is a 
wizard, opening a gate to the Dreamlands.
Big ending
Beware of using a climactic scene as a starting point from 
which to create a scenario. It can be done, but it involves a lot 
of work to figure out how to achieve the climax—and what if 
your players do something that will avert the climactic event?
A twist or hideous revelation
Come up with something exciting, mysterious or horrible, then 
create a scenario as a vehicle to deliver it. M. Night Shyamalan 
has used this technique to good effect in his films. For example, 
unbeknownst to them, one of the investigators is the evildoer, 
possessed or controlled by some malign force. The truth will 
most likely only be revealed towards the end of the game.
Begin with the player characters
Have the players generate their investigators and then use these 
characters and their backstories as the inspiration for a scenario. 
This has the potential to be a strongly player-led game.
Construct Layers of Mystery
At the heart of a Call of Cthulhu  scenario is a mystery, 
something the investigators must find out in order to 
progress and affect an outcome. Mysteries can be organized 
like the layers of an onion: each clue tears away one layer and 
leads to a further question or puzzle to solve (another layer). 
These layers might go on and on until the investigators feel 
they have a possible explanation or answer, which in turn 
directs them to some form of action.
In Lovecraft’s The Case of Charles Dexter Ward, for example, 
young Ward begins by investigating the ancient writings of his 
wizard ancestor (there’s our story; our onion). As he investigates 
further (peeling away the first layer of the onion), he discovers 
a technique to raise the dead. He tries it (peeling away a second 
layer of the onion), and is able to raise his ancestor, who proves 
to be a near twin of Ward in appearance. This ancestor then 
becomes Ward’s mentor in the arcane arts (the third layer of the 
onion). However, young Ward proves too squeamish and his 
ancestor murders him and takes his place. That’s the end of the 
scenario for Ward, and the end of the first onion for us.
Y oung Ward’s doctor then starts his investigations, 
researching along the same lines Ward began. This is the 
initial layer of a new onion. Dr. Willett finds that the ancient 
house of the sinister ancestor still stands and visits it (the 
second layer of this onion). In the house’s vast basements, 
Willett encounters horrific sights and beings, and discovers 
how to lay to rest the evil ancestor whom he suspects has 
displaced his patient, young Ward (this is the third layer of 
the new onion). Now full of knowledge and determination, 
Willett visits the insane asylum where the evil ancestor 
masquerades as the young Ward. There, Willett recites the 
Resurrection spell backward, destroying the ancestor and 
finishing the second onion and the story as well.
Each layer of a scenario should present the investigators 
with two or three choices as to where to proceed. Players 
should never be certain that they have delved to the bottom 
of a mystery, except for their own purposes, nor should they 
ever be certain of the Keeper’s intentions. Obviously, the 
Keeper cannot make scenarios infinitely deep and complex, 
so must either break off play when the investigators get too 
deep, or improvise. If breaking off from play, this should only 
be until the Keeper manages to extend the scenario further 
and give more depth to the mysteries.
Using Lovecraftian Themes
The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the 
oldest and strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown.
—H.P . Lovecraft, Supernatural Horror in Literature
Key themes can be recognized throughout Lovecraft’s 
writing, either lurking underneath the text or central to 
the plot. Utilizing these themes when designing scenarios 
and running games of Call of Cthulhu can help imbue your 
games with an undercurrent of Lovecraftian horror.
Fear… 
of the Alien, the Outsider , of Knowledge
A central tenet presented in nearly all of Lovecraft’s fiction 
is fear of the unknown. Anything that comes from outside 
of your normal reality, your day-to-day existence, is to be 
feared. Such things have a way of invading your space, your 
life, and ultimately destroying your very personality and 
way of life. Man is imprisoned and isolated. Truth lies in the 
dark, secret places of the world; in ancient woods, hollow 
hills, and remote locales. Every stranger could be hiding 
something, plotting your demise, or wanting something of 
yours. Investigators find themselves cut off from civilization 
(no phones, ho help, no safety) with no one who will come 
to their aid. They are the “outsiders” .
Knowledge causes pain, sorrow, and death. Books of 
secrets and magic are to be feared; they change how you 
perceive the world around you, they question your faith, and 
obliterate your very soul. Better they are destroyed or kept 
hidden lest some fool messes with things best left sleeping.
The realization that something has affected you, be it 
alien implants, false memories, or dark truths, can make 
for highly immersive and scary stories. The investigators 
and their players may not know these secrets as the game 
starts—part of the horror (and fun) comes from unraveling 
the mystery and facing up to the big revelation. 
Suggested reading: The Case of Charles Dexter Ward, The 
Call of Cthulhu. 
===== PDF page index 226 (rulebook p.226) =====
215 
chapter 10: playing the game

===== PDF page index 227 (rulebook p.227) =====
216 
Call of Cthulhu
Corruption…  
of the Body, the Mind, the World
A pervading sense of corruption, in mind and body. Many of 
Lovecraft’s stories carry a sense of decay in their surroundings 
and settings, as well as in the mental and physical decay of 
the protagonists. The slow, but inevitable creep of corruption 
can be a useful backdrop to a scenario to inspire a theme 
of foreboding and dread. Keepers can also take this theme 
and make it personal; for example, the slow developing and 
frightening metamorphosis of an investigator into a deep 
one (the Innsmouth taint) or into a ghoul. Alterations in 
appearance and habits over time may provoke Sanity point 
loss for the investigator as well as those around him or her. 
The investigators in question may not be aware of what is 
happening, perhaps thinking the changes are caused by the 
slow creep of a dreadful disease or the results of insanity and 
delusion.
Family bloodlines carry “memories” and taints. 
Descendants cannot escape the stain of evil crimes committed 
by their forebears; unwittingly, they begin to mirror such 
dark deeds. Exposure to the Mythos drains not only sanity 
but also humanity. Those who repeatedly risk contact with 
things not of this world may become corrupted, losing their 
faith and mind. What lengths would such a person go to? 
The world around us is decaying. Walk any street, look 
at the signs in the window, look into the eyes of strangers 
on the street corners. The end is near. What hope is left? 
Everything good crumbles away and is replaced with a 
mocking, choking darkness.
Suggested reading: The Rats in the Walls, The Lurking Fear, 
The Shadow Over Innsmouth, The Colour Out of Space. 
Cosmic Horror…  
the Nightmare of Reality,  
the Place of Humanity, the Cold Universe
At the start of the twentieth century, humanity’s increased 
reliance upon science was both opening new worlds and 
solidifying the manners by which they could be understood. 
Lovecraft portrays this scientific potential as a terrifying 
hole in man's understanding of the universe. 
The cosmos is uncaring and humanity is but a speck of 
dust, inconsequential. Mankind is simply, at best, sport for 
those from outside to prey upon. The universe is a dark place 
that mocks humanity’s feeble attempts to understand it. 
The quest for the unknown is the pursuit of madness. 
Strange experiments gone wrong (or right!) and the 
construction of devices that lift the veil of mankind’s ignorance 
lead such explorers into darkest and most terrifying realms 
of reality and possibility. Man was not meant to know such 
things and those who seek for the unknown return “changed. ” 
The very biology and composition of Mythos creatures is 
beyond man’s ability to know and understand. It is dangerous 
to become exposed to such matter; even being in the presence 
of such creatures and their technology is anathema to humans, 
causing headaches, pain, and a pervading dread.
Suggested reading: The Dreams in the Witch House, From 
Beyond, At the Mountains of Madness.
Of course, Lovecraft didn’t confine himself to Cthulhu 
Mythos stories and neither should you. Gain inspiration 
from other writers, television, films and folklore. Let your 
imagination roam.
Opening Scene
Every journey starts with a first step. The start of a scenario 
establishes the premise by which the investigators become 
involved and effectively provides the players with their 
initial direction of investigation and research. 
Don’t miss the opportunity to hook the players’ interest 
from the first with an exciting or intriguing opening scene. 
Ensure that it is thoroughly engaging and something the 
investigators can’t ignore.
Anatomy of a Linear Scenario
While scenarios can come in all shapes and forms, the 
majority share some common elements, much like a classic 
piece of detective fiction. A beginning, middle, and an end is 
a good place to start. Without these three a scenario will lack 
definition and has the potential to become a confusing mess, 
not only for the players, but also for the Keeper. 
The beginning sets up the whole game: it hooks the 
players’ interest, sets the tone and mood, and provides 
an initial source of clues and leads for investigation. The 
middle is where the investigators get to pursue information, 
meet non-player characters, discover clues, and begin to 
piece together the bigger picture. The end comes when the 
investigators have (more or less) discovered what’s going on 
and have decided to confront the big villain or at least have 
a workable solution to solve the mystery. All this comes to 
a climax, when the truth is (probably) revealed, the villain 
caught or dispatched, and some form of resolution is reached.
Linear adventures can be characterized like a car journey. 
If you know your destination you can plan a route—perhaps 
driving a certain way to take in some wonderful scenery. If 
Your scenario begins with the players learning about 
a murder through newspaper reports. Could this be 
made more engaging? What if one of the investigators 
discovered the mangled corpse while walking his dog. 
Consider what the investigator’s reaction might be? Is 
the scene challenging enough? Could it be ignored by 
the player? The example is unpleasant, but might not 
lead anywhere beyond the investigator inspecting the 
scene for clues and calling the police. What if the victim 
is known to the investigator and able to talk for a brief 
time before dying? What if the victim is someone the 
investigator would be glad to see the back of? Perhaps 
someone to whom the investigator is in debt? Take a 
look at the investigators’ backstories for inspiration.
===== PDF page index 228 (rulebook p.228) =====
217 
chapter 10: playing the game
you encounter bad traffic en route, you can make a detour. 
This might affect your journey time but you’ll still get to your 
destination in the end. The scenario starts at point “ A ” and 
ends at point “E, ” with the investigators journeying through 
points “B, ” “C, ” and “D” en route. 
Constructing a plot is essential to good linear scenario 
design, and this is easy to do. Just think about the books you’ve 
read, films and TV you’ve watched, and stories you’ve been 
told. All of these can provide great inspiration. Don’t be afraid 
to steal a cool idea or recreate a whole story as the basis of 
your scenario’s plot—every Keeper worth his or her (essential) 
salt steals from movies and books. If you don’t know where to 
start, grab a collection of Lovecraft stories and get reading! 
Changing a few names and mixing up the monsters in a 
particular Lovecraft story is the perfect way to start.
Most players, as they become more familiar with the 
game and confident in their investigators, will want to 
diverge from the linear scenario. Rather than follow the 
obvious clues laid out for them by the Keeper, they will 
want to follow up a different clue or even come up with a 
line of enquiry entirely of their own devising. Suddenly the 
adventure is sidetracked and the Keeper may be tempted 
to contrive something to get the story back on its intended 
track rather than go where the players are heading. If the 
players are compelled back to the Keeper’s prepared plot, 
they will come to feel that their contribution is of little value 
and that they are simply following a preordained story rather 
than creating their own. This means that it’s time to look at 
running scenarios in a non-linear way.
The Anatomy of a Non-Linear Scenario
Novice Keepers are advised to create linear stories at first, 
moving onto non-linear scenarios as their experience and 
confidence grows. 
In a non-linear adventure, after starting out at point 
A, the successive points may be encountered in a different 
order each time the scenario is played and various unknown 
endings may ultimately be reached. 
In creating a sandbox, the Keeper is establishing a 
“geography” for the game wherein numerous interconnected 
or separate plots can be set for the investigators to discover over 
the course of play. Should the players go off at a tangent, the 
Keeper is well-versed enough in the setting to accommodate 
the developing story. Note that you are not writing a story 
when you create a non-linear scenario. Above all, you do 
not script an ending—avoid this at all costs! Y ou may write a 
backstory, but it must stop where the game starts. What you 
are creating is plot elements (non-player characters, locations, 
etc.), but how these are woven together into a story is decided 
during play. Y ou may also make a timeline of events that will 
take place in the story if the course of events is not altered by 
the investigators, but you must be ready to alter the events on 
the timeline according to the actions of the players.
Sometimes the players will miss clues or head down a 
path the Keeper did not foresee.  This is fine; in fact, it is 
better than fine, as some of the best parts of a game are those 
improvised in play. 
Non-linear adventures give the player's choice in how to 
proceed. The very fact that unexpected things will happen 
because of the players’ choices makes for a more exciting game 
for everyone—the Keeper included. In this sense, the story 
really does become a collaboration between the Keeper and 
players. 
Let’s take a look at one of the scenarios in this book—
Amidst the Ancient Trees (page 346). The scenario 
begins at point A, as the investigators are called to join 
a posse to find a missing girl. Point B would encompass 
the various scenes that may be encountered before 
entering point C. The order in which the investigator’s 
play through the scenes is more-or-less up to them and 
the keeper, but eventually they will encounter the lake 
for the climax of the scenario (Point D).
As you can see, the plot is driven in one direction 
by the acquisition of clues and sparse information. 
Think of it like a train track—the story can only go 
one way. This is fine for novice Keepers and players 
who are getting to grips with the game. However, it 
relies on the players doing what is expected of them—
following the clues in the right order.
The  King in Yellow, an avatar of Hastur

===== PDF page index 229 (rulebook p.229) =====
218 
Call of Cthulhu
Campaigns
If a scenario were likened to an episode of a television series, 
a campaign would be a season or perhaps an entire series. A 
published campaign is divided into chapters, each of which 
might be considered one scenario. The chapters are linked 
with a common theme or story-arc. Depending on the 
campaign, the chapters may need to be completed in a set 
order or there may be a flexibility to accommodate playing 
the chapters in different orders, depending on the actions of 
the investigators.
First, think up several scenario plots, each only two or 
three layers deep. With three or four scenarios in mind, 
think about how they might connect to a central horror 
or mystery. The players start out fooling around with the 
very edges of the Mythos, where there are dozens of myths, 
legends, clues, and adventures. As they gain more knowledge 
and experience, the investigators will work their way inward, 
into stories of greater depth. After several such stories, the 
players should begin to see the links between the various 
scenarios. At the center of the mystery lies the hideous truth 
and the climax of the campaign.
Let's take the plot of well-known horror film, John Carpen-
ter’s The Thing, as the basis for a Call of Cthulhu scenario. 
The basic summary of the film is as follows:
The crew of a remote Antarctic research facility 
unwittingly takes in a shape-shifting alien that proceeds 
to murder and replicate members of the team. The alien 
has been awoken from centuries of sleep by men digging 
in the ice and is now trying to survive while constructing a 
spacecraft to escape the Antarctic. 
These are the key ingredients of the story—there’s plenty 
more going on, but this will be enough for now. Taking 
these ideas, let's rework the plot for Call of Cthulhu.
The Setup (“the mystery”):
A team of researchers from Miskatonic University 
is called to investigate the disappearance of members of 
an archaeological dig in the Vermont countryside. The 
only known facts are that the archaeological team had 
discovered the remains of an ancient site and had been 
conducting the dig for one month. A few days ago, some 
local people visited the site only to discover the team had 
inexplicably disappeared, leaving all of their possessions 
and equipment.
What’s going on:
The team unearthed a stone tablet on which was 
inscribed the spell Summon/Bind Star Vampire and, 
unwittingly, one of them cast the spell. The archaeological 
team were eaten by the monster (a star vampire), with only 
one survivor (we’ll call him Ted). While the spell worked, 
the summoned star vampire was not bound properly and 
so is free to do as it pleases. At the moment it is roaming 
the woods, randomly murdering the locals, livestock and 
wildlife until it decides to transport itself back from whence 
it came. The missing bodies of the archeological team can 
be found in the woods near the dig site—such discoveries 
can be made by the local police and/or the investigators. 
Ted is also roaming the woods, having fled the monster’s 
attack. He has lost his mind and is insane. Star vampires 
are invisible most of the time, so no one knows who is 
carrying out the murders, and suspicion falls upon Ted.
So, we have a relatively isolated location (enough for 
the investigators to feel they are on their own, but close 
enough to civilization for a range of non-player characters 
to be introduced (local farmers, the police, etc.) We have a 
reason for a team of investigators to be there (let’s assume 
the investigators can be from Miskatonic University) and 
we have a nasty monster! 
How to solve it:
Once at the site, the investigators will need to explore 
the dig site, examine the remains of those murdered, 
question the locals, and ultimately discover the stone tablet, 
before learning the spell properly and casting it to dispel 
the monster. While trying to do this, all sorts of craziness 
occurs as the monster is on the loose and is working its 
way around the local farms, killing livestock and people. 
Meanwhile, Ted is being hunted by the police as suspect 
number one. It is up to the investigators to save Ted and 
banish or kill the monster.
Three potential endings (just examples, there are many 
more):
T Some of the investigators engage the monster in 
combat as others chant the spell at the site. As it 
kills its second investigator, the spell takes effect 
and the creature is banished.
T The star vampire uses its magic to control the 
local policeman, who leads the investigators into 
a trap, leading to a chaotic scene that ends with 
half of the investigators dead and the remaining 
ones fleeing madly into the night.
T The investigators discover the stone tablet and 
destroy it, believing it to be the source of the 
evil. They may have just signed their own death 
warrants!
As you can see, from the simple idea of a monster 
attacking a research team, you can begin to construct a 
scenario, adding as many bells and whistles as you like. 
As in The Thing , the investigators aren’t the ones who 
unleash the monster; instead they have to research what 
happened to the original team and try to fix the mess they 
find themselves in.
===== PDF page index 230 (rulebook p.230) =====
219 
chapter 10: playing the game
There should be hoaxes and meaningless trails 
sprinkled among the scenarios. These will keep your world 
from degenerating into a mass of monsters and their kin. 
Gamblers, spies, religious fanatics, drug smugglers, slavers, 
grasping entrepreneurs, venal labor bosses, terrorists, movie 
stars, nefarious politicians, and piratical sea captains are also 
available. An occasional scenario with dangers originating 
from this (mundane) world might divert your players, 
but keep in mind that the main theme of the game is the 
investigators’ struggle against the Cthulhu Mythos. 
Within each scenario you prepare, sprinkle additional 
information that relates to the “big picture”—the main plot 
and what is really happening in the background. As the 
investigators work through the scenarios, these disparate 
pieces of information should begin to form connections, 
driving the investigators to pursue new lines of enquiry 
and leading them ever deeper into the main plot until they 
reach a point of realization as to what is really going on and 
who the real enemy is. This point of realization from various 
disassociated clues should prepare the investigators for their 
biggest challenge and the climax of the campaign.
Chaosium has published a number of campaigns for Call 
of Cthulhu, including Horror on the Orient Express and The 
Masks of Nyarlathotep. If you are you new to the concept of 
campaigns then reading (and playing!) through a published 
campaign will give you a good grasp of how individual 
scenarios can be linked to form a campaign.
Level of Detail
We’ve looked at how to structure linear and non-linear 
scenarios and campaigns, but what should a finished 
scenario look like? The scenarios at the back of this book 
are by different authors, each with their own style. However, 
these are of course published scenarios and each has had to 
meet certain requirements and standards that may not be 
required for the homegrown scenario. 
Just as there is no single way to start when writing a 
scenario, there is no prescribed end product. Compare 
creating a scenario with making a speech. When making a 
speech, some people are able to make it up on the spot with 
little or no preparation, while others make a few notes to 
improvise around and still others write the whole thing out 
word for word. These various levels of preparation can work 
equally well—there is no right or wrong here. The important 
thing is to know what level of detail you personally require. 
If you are writing a scenario, it might be no more than 
a handful of notes. If you are new to running games, it is 
unlikely that you will feel confident enough to use this 
approach initially. If used successfully, the results of the 
"notes" approach can prove highly rewarding as the low level 
of preparation encourages greater improvisation, leading to 
more creative and unpredictable play. 
How to Use a Published Scenario
The great thing about a published scenario is that the work 
has been done for you and lots of detailed background 
and setting material is provided for you to use. Depending 
on how you approach it, this can feel like a blessing or a 
burden. If you are someone who can read a large quantity 
of text quickly, identify the salient points and retain the 
information, then you are off to a flying start. Most of us, 
however, will find we forget certain parts, requiring us 
to break the flow of the game to consult the scenario text, 
clumsily leafing through the pages in search of those elusive 
but seemingly all-important details.
So how best to use a published scenario? To start 
with, leaf through the scenario and gain an overview of 
the chapters and contents, then read the whole document 
thoroughly from cover to cover once. Y ou should now have 
Crimson Letters (page 364) is 
an example of a non-linear or 
“sandbox” structure scenario. 
The investigators can roam around 
the sandbox wherever they like, in 
whatever order they like—discovering 
and unlocking the plot as they go. 
In the course of the scenario, 
the onus is on the investigators 
to choose where to visit and who 
to talk to.
The scenario may end in a 
desperate battle with the source 
of the evil, with a shootout 
at Unconsidered Trifles, with a 
confrontation with Atlantic City 
gangsters or with the investigators 
locked-up in Arkham Sanitarium. 
When preparing a sandbox scenario, 
you don’t need to write lengthy 
descriptions of each locale. Just a 
few bullet-points about each will 
suffice to act as reminder. Your 
notes should include possible clues 
to be found and how they connect 
to other non-player characters or 
locations. Non-player characters 
don’t need to have all their skills 
detailed; a profession, a few bullet 
points and relationships to other 
characters should suffice. 
In one scenario, papers found in the old Starry Wis -
dom cult chapel in Boston could mention the Esoteric 
Order of Dagon. Later, in another scenario, investiga-
tions of swamp cults in Louisiana could unearth con-
nections to a master cult in New England, centered in 
Innsmouth, also called the Esoteric Order of Dagon.
===== PDF page index 231 (rulebook p.231) =====
220 
Call of Cthulhu

===== PDF page index 232 (rulebook p.232) =====
221 
chapter 10: playing the game
a good understanding of what the scenario is about, but 
you may still be hazy on some of the details, perhaps not 
quite grasping the roles played by some of the non-player 
characters; this is fine. 
Next, work through the scenario again, this time taking 
notes. Try to write a bare minimum. Avoid superfluous 
detail or things that you feel confident that you’ll remember 
anyway. Identify text that is simply adding color and reduce 
or omit it. For example, the text might describe a bedroom 
in great detail, down to the color of the bedspread, the 
wallpaper, the contents of the bedside cabinet and other 
furnishings. If you are confident that none of this information 
is vital and that you can improvise a description of a similar 
room during play then there is no need to record the details 
in your notes. Y ou are not doing the published adventure 
any disrespect—the printed text of the scenario has served 
its purpose in communicating to you, the reader, an image 
of the bedroom. When you run the game you will be able 
to describe a bedroom inspired by what you read in the 
scenario. Whether the bedspread is pink or blue is neither 
here nor there. What may be important is whether it is an 
opulent suite or a seedy motel room, and you will know this 
from having read the published text. 
Be sure to identify and note down anything that is 
essential to the scenario. Y ou will know what is important 
and what is not because you have read the scenario once 
already. Clearly if the scenario notes that there is a copy of 
the Cultes des Goules in the bedside cabinet then you need to 
note its presence. In your mind it might better be concealed 
under the bed or beneath a loose floorboard—the location is 
not important, only its presence.
To run a scenario effectively you need to feel ownership of 
it. After this second reading of the scenario, you should have 
a set of notes from which you can run the game in your own 
way. See how you have distilled a published scenario back to 
Keeper’s notes, perhaps similar to those used by the author 
when the game was run for the very first time. Use these notes 
as a framework and with your players you’ll create wonderful 
new stories that would amaze the scenario’s author!
And Finally...
If there’s one thing you need above all others to make this 
game fun, it is a positive enthusiasm to make stuff up and 
create conflict and drama. That spark of life trumps all the 
rules and advice that anyone can give you on how to run a 
game. On its own, enthusiasm will not make you a great 
Keeper, but without it you will never be one. If anything in 
this book excited you, then focus on that. Get fired up, get 
excited and share that with your players so that they feel it too.
Now go and have fun!
A published scenario describes a room as follows:
Main bedroom: A comfortable bedroom with a 
large window overlooking the rear garden. Clothes 
lie scattered across the floor and the room would 
benefit from a good clean. A wooden bedside 
cabinet contains a copy of the Cultes des Goules in a 
locked drawer. 
Your notes might reduce this to:
Main bedroom, grubby, hidden Cultes des 
Goules.
