
===== PDF page index 233 (rulebook p.233) =====

===== PDF page index 234 (rulebook p.234) =====

===== PDF page index 235 (rulebook p.235) =====
224 
Call of Cthulhu
ythos tomes are the repositories of arcane 
wisdom, terrible secrets, and powerful magic. 
They provide the seeker of enlightenment 
with stark truths about reality, existence, and 
presence of those from outside. For the unwary, 
such books delineate a path to nightmare, horror, and insanity.
This chapter summarizes the books of the Cthulhu 
Mythos most often mentioned in the fiction of the Lovecraft  
Circle of writers. 
Describing Mythos Tomes
Some Mythos volumes are recent enough in origin to have 
been printed with movable type. Those editions were usually 
published privately in short press runs and only sold to rich 
collectors or acquaintances. Upon publication, copies often 
were sought out and destroyed by the authorities due to 
their scandalous nature. Better these texts be burned and 
suppressed. Such was the fate of the original publication of 
The King in Yellow. 
Where surviving copies exist, these have often have been 
ill-treated by the crazed or malicious, or else rebound to 
disguise their blasphemous contents. Bound manuscripts 
were never regularized by typesetting and printing, 
and their wavering, blotted handwriting may be wholly 
incomprehensible for pages at a time, a situation remedied 
only by great dedication and scholarship.
Even though each book’s summary is uniform in these 
rules, assume that each copy of a Mythos book can be 
different from its fellows. Though the logic of that potential 
diminishes for recent books, such as Azathoth and Others, 
even then bindings may be broken, pages torn out, and 
signatures missing or wrongly collated. Contents may be 
ink-stained or acid-scarred, with pages half-burnt and the 
words made illegible or utterly defaced by madmen (or by 
sane men who sought to destroy the dangerous information 
therein). Unique information may be written as marginalia 
or jotted down on notepaper and inserted here or there. 
Some tomes begin to possess their own “character” as 
they grow in age. Passed down through the generations, 
between family members, booksellers, and collectors, the 
tomes seem to absorb an imprint of their owners. This can 
be more than simply the wandering marginalia of occult 
scholars, with some books apparently manifesting distinct 
“personalities” that echo once-powerful owners, such as 
grand sorcerers and cult potentates. Consider the smell, feel, 
and look of Mythos books. The overall impression ought to 
be distinctly unhealthy. The binding will probably be leather, 
perhaps human or even that of some unworldly being. Does 
the leather leave a slimy residue when touched? Does the 
book leave a musky odor wherever it has been? Does the 
presence of the tome cause the pages of other, nearby books 
to char and blacken? Perhaps the book appears to move of 
its own accord, never to be found where the investigator 
remembers placing it.
Sorcerers and cultists are not librarians. They are 
unconcerned with the needs of posterity. They intend to live 
forever and they consider the knowledge contained within 
their tomes to be theirs by right—and not to be lightly 
passed to the unworthy.
Undiscovered Editions
If an original-language version is found of a work that until 
then was known only in translation, then the original version 
is more informative. Add a few percentiles to the Cthulhu 
Mythos skill reward. Treat the original edition as another 
edition. The Keeper chooses the book’s original language 
and can make up its title in that language as well.
If a you create a new Mythos tome for some purpose, you 
should have a suitable name for it, know the language of its 
composition, know what it looks and feels like, know how 
many Sanity points are lost in reading it, know how many 
Cthulhu Mythos points its comprehension adds, and be able 
to determine what spells (if any) can be found within it.
Using Mythos Tomes
Despite the dangers, investigators will choose to study this or 
that terrifying book. The process of reading can be leisurely 
and can be suspended at any point for as long as need be.
Consider that each book is a potential conduit of 
Mythos power and energy—a physical and mental portal 
to the madness of secrets beyond the reasoning of mortal 
man. Books of power may exert a dark influence on those 
who possess them, stoking their desire for blasphemous 
knowledge, kindling a fascination for the occult, and 
ultimately driving the owner to delve deep into the 
Mythos and court insanity. In many Lovecraftian stories, 
the protagonist is thrown headfirst into the horrors of the 
Mythos as a result of some Mythos artifact or tome.
Akin to spells, Mythos tomes can unbalance a game 
if used too freely. Such books are a conduit for Cthulhu 
Mythos knowledge and spells, providing the investigators 
with a potential source of great power in combating the 
machinations of the Mythos. If everywhere the investigators 
turn they find a Mythos tome, then the game can become 
predictable and the challenge lessened. Obtaining a 
Mythos book could be a scenario in itself, or at least a 
suitably dangerous sidetrack to a campaign, allowing the 
investigators to gain secrets that help them in their quest 
against the minions of the Mythos. 
This power and knowledge comes at a price. In Call 
of Cthulhu, this usually means an increasing descent into 
madness. While players will desire to gain Mythos books, 
they should also fear them, due to the terrible sanity 
depleting effect they will have on their investigators. 
Investigator possession of a Mythos tome should always 
carry a consequence. This may simply be the cost in sanity, as 
described above, or some other story-related consequence. 
Try to devise corrupted investigator background 
entries that drive the story forward. Think about how the 
investigator’s relationship with the Mythos tome could be 
manipulated to compel the game’s narrative, add further depth 
to the investigator, and suggest roleplaying opportunities to 

===== PDF page index 236 (rulebook p.236) =====
225 
chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore
the player concerned. While other investigators view the 
Mythos tome in question as a smelly, evil-looking book, the 
investigator who has become corrupted by it will see it in 
a quite different light. An investigator may feel compelled 
to hide the book away in case it gets “hurt, ” or perhaps the 
deluded investigator cannot read another book without the 
tome’s text burning through the print. 
Possible corrupted investigator background entries:
T The tome is a source of secrets I must know—  
I must learn more!
T No one is allowed to touch my book.
T The book speaks to me and I must obey.
T The book is evil, and so am I for reading it.
T Wherever I put the book it kills anything near to it.
T The book is changing me—I hunger for human flesh!
Mythos books may also provide the inspiration 
for investigator delusions (see Insanity side-effects 2: 
Delusions and Reality Checks, page 162). Perhaps the book 
somehow influences the investigator or the investigator 
sees the book everywhere—even though it was apparently 
destroyed. Delusions centered on a Mythos tome can have 
all manner of effects upon the investigators, whether to 
throw them off-track or guide them through insane insight.
A Note About the Entries
Information about the tomes described may be known by 
erudite bibliophiles, historians, and by a few in the rare book 
trade. While it is unlikely that such books will be found on 
the shelves of the common public library, some can be found 
in the rare book sections of certain universities and in private 
collections. Apart from those listed, other versions, as well 
as lesser Mythos works exist, as do incidental notebooks, 
diaries, and letters. Keepers are advised to review the entries 
for inspiration when designing new volumes of forgotten 
lore, cultist notebooks, and so on.
Where two dates are noted for multiple Mythos books: 
the latter date in each case is the date ascribed in the original 
story. Some dates are conjectural. If available at all, the number 
of copies listed reflects those known to be held in public and 
private collections. More existing copies are very likely. 
Dimensions given are traditional, since actual sizes often 
vary between copies. Folios range from 12.5" × 20" to 10" 
× 15". Quartos vary between 10" × 12.5" and 7.5" × 10". 
Octavos range between 6.25" × 10" and 5" × 7.5".
The summaries also include average weeks of study per book. 
When using such numbers, take into account the individual 
reader’s skills and profession. Use the times and dates given here 
as comparative indicators of difficulty. Each investigator will 
study and comprehend a book at a different rate.
Al Azif—see Necronomicon .
Azathoth and Others
English, Edward Derby, 1919
A collection of the Arkham-born poet’s early works. 
Published in Boston in a pocket-sized edition, 3.5" × 5.5" 
and bound in black leather. Approximately 1,400 copies 
were printed and sold. 
Sanity Loss: 1D4
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+3 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 12
Study: 1 week 
Suggested Spells: none.
The tome is trying to get back to what “it” considers 
as its rightful owner by sending out messages in the 
form of dark dreams in the hope that its master will 
find it. While the investigators suffer from hideous 
nightmares, the book’s true owner is closing in and 
waiting for a chance to take back what was stolen. 
The Mythos tome has proved to be most useful, par -
ticularly to the investigator who read it (gaining some 
points in the Cthulhu Mythos skill and a couple of 
spells). However, the loss of sanity caused by reading 
tome is manifesting as an unhealthy obsession with 
the book. The Keeper decides to give the investigator 
a new “corrupted” entry in their background (under 
Treasured Possessions): “Will not part with the Book 
of Iod, takes it wherever he goes. ” 
Key
Sanity Loss: Automatic Sanity loss for reading the tome.
Cthulhu Mythos: First number shows Cthulhu Mythos points 
gained from an Initial reading (CMI) see page 173. Second 
number shows Cthulhu Mythos points gained for a Full reading 
(CMF), see page 174. 
Mythos Rating:  Percentage chance for finding a useful 
reference within the tome, see page 175.
Study: Suggested time required to conduct a Full reading of 
the tome.
Suggested Spells:  A list of possible spells to be found 
within the tome. 
===== PDF page index 237 (rulebook p.237) =====
226 
Call of Cthulhu
Book of Dzyan
English, author/translation unknown, reputedly of ancient origin
Long referred to by theosophist Helena Blavatsky, a copy 
of this tome has never been verified. Said to be a translation 
of manuscripts original to Atlantis. Also called the Stanzas 
of Dzyan . Portions of this work were translated as The 
Secret Doctrine, but that includes no spells or other Mythos 
information. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+6 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 27
Study: 14 weeks
Suggested Spells: Call Forth Childe of the Woode 
(Summon/Bind Dark Y oung), Call Forth Wind 
Spirit (Summon/Bind Byakhee), Call Forth The 
Unseen Walker (Summon/Bind Dimensional 
Shambler), Dream Vision (Contact Deity/Cthul -
hu).
The Book of Eibon
Three versions follow:
Book of Eibon 
English, translation unknown, c. 15th century
A flawed and incomplete translation. Eighteen copies by 
various hands are known to exist today. 
Sanity Loss: 2D4
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+8 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 33
Study: 32 weeks
Suggested Spells:  Call/Dismiss Azathoth, Contact 
Formless Spawn of Zhothaqquah (Formless Spawn), 
Contact Deity/ Kthulhut (Cthulhu), Contact Deity/
Y ok Zothoth (Y og-Sothoth), Contact Deity/Zhoth-
aqquah (Tsathoggua), Create Gate, Create Mist of 
R’lyeh, Enchant Knife, Green Decay, Wither Limb.
Liber Ivonis
Latin, translated by Caius Phillipus Faber, 9th century 
Although the original is said to have been written by Eibon, 
wizard of Hyperborea, no earlier versions than the Latin 
have been verified. Never printed, six bound manuscript 
versions have been listed in library collections. 
Sanity Loss: 2D4
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+9 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 39
Study: 36 weeks 
Suggested Spells:  Call/Dismiss Azathoth, Contact 
Formless Spawn of Zhothaqquah (Formless Spawn), 
Contact Deity/ Kthulhut (Cthulhu), Contact Deity/
Y ok Zothoth (Y og-Sothoth), Contact Deity/Zhoth-
aqquah (Tsathoggua), Create Barrier of Naach-Tith, 
Create Gate, Create Mist of R’lyeh, Enchant Knife, 
Green Decay, Voorish Sign, Wither Limb.
Livre d’Ivon
French, translated by Gaspard du Nord, c. 13th century 
Bound, handwritten manuscript of which thirteen 
specimens, partial or complete, are known to exist. 
Sanity Loss: 2D4
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+8 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 36
Study: 36 weeks 
Suggested Spells: same as Liber Ivonis.
Celaeno Fragments
Holographic manuscript in English, by Dr. Laban Shrewsbury, 
1915 (1938) 
A single copy is known to exist, deposited at Miskatonic 
University Library shortly before the author mysteriously 
disappeared. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+6 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 27
Study: 15 weeks
Suggested Spells: Brew Space Mead, Call Cthugha, Elder 
Sign, Enchant Whistle, Summon/Bind Byakhee. 
Egyptians are thought to have come 
into possession of the Book of Eibon 
through trading with fabled Atlantis. 
Survivors of the great Atlantian 
disaster are also thought to have       
carried the book with them, inscribed 
on tablets, to many parts of Europe, 
including Ireland, France, and Greece.
Through a pact with Tsathoggua,       
Eibon gained greater knowledge and 
power, and even went so far as to 
discover a way to pass through the 
seals of the god’s throne room under 
Mount Voormithadreth to personally 
visit him. 
In fear of his power, the priests 
of Yhoundeth drove a campaign of               
persecution against Eibon, finally causing 
him to flee through a “door” that led 
to Saturn. Despite the years since this 
happened, wanderers of dreams and other 
places have, from time to time, mentioned 
meeting an ancient sage called Eibon. 
Whether this is one and the same remains 
conjecture.
===== PDF page index 238 (rulebook p.238) =====
227 
chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore
Confessions of the Mad Monk  
Clithanus
Latin, by Clithanus, 400 (1674)
A retreading of material Clithanus gleaned from reading 
the Necronomicon. Contains lengthy treatise on sigils of 
protection and the spawn of Cthulhu.
Copies are maintained at the Field Museum of Chicago, 
the British Museum, and the Union Theological Seminary 
in Manhattan.
Sanity Loss: 2D6
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+6 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 27
Study: 29 weeks
Suggested Spells:  Call Down the Blasphemies of the 
Oceans (Contact Star-Spawn of Cthulhu), Sign of 
the Master (Elder Sign), Warding.
Cthaat Aquadingen 
Two versions follow:
Cthaat Aquadingen
Latin, author unknown, c. 11-12th century
A comprehensive study of the deep ones. Three copies of this 
Latin version exist, identically bound in human skin said to 
sweat when the humidity drops too low. One is allegedly 
held at the British Museum—although the museum denies 
this—and the other two are owned by British collectors.
Sanity Loss: 2D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+9 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 39
Study: 46 weeks
Suggested Spells:  Dreams from God (Contact Deity/
Cthulhu), Dreams from Zattoqua (Contact Deity/
Tsathoggua), Dreams of the Drowner (Contact 
Deity/Yibb-Tstll), Speak with Sea Children (Contact 
Deep Ones), Speak with Father Dagon, Speak with 
Mother Hydra (Contact Deep One/Mother Hydra) 
Speak with God-Child (Contact Star-Spawn of 
Cthulhu), Nyhargo Dirge (this last spell is a reversal 
of the Resurrection spell, used to destroy revenants).
Cthaat Aquadingen
Middle English, author and translator unknown, c. 14th century
A comprehensive study of the deep ones, but in an incomplete 
and deeply flawed translation. A single bound manuscript is 
held by the British Museum. 
Sanity Loss: 2D4 
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+4 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 18
Study: 29 weeks
Suggested Spells:  Dreams from God (Contact Deity/
Cthulhu), Speak with Sea Children (Contact Deep 
Ones), Speak with Father Dagon, Speak with Mother 
Hydra, Speak with God-Child (Contact Star-Spawn 
of Cthulhu).
Cthulhu in the Necronomicon
English, written by Dr. Laban Shrewsbury, 1915 (pub: 1938) 
Handwritten notes toward an intended book. Deposited 
at Miskatonic University Library shortly before the author 
mysteriously disappeared. Tells of Cthulhu’s power to affect 
men’s dreams, warning of a worldwide cult dedicated to the 
creature’s return.
Sanity Loss: 1D6
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+4 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 18
Study: 14 weeks
Suggested Spells: Contact Deity/Cthulhu, Contact Deep 
Ones, Elder Sign.
Cultes des Goules
French, by François-Honore Balfour, Comte d’Erlette, 1702? 
Published in 1703 in France (Paris?), in a quarto edition. 
The Church immediately denounced it. Catalogs a large 
cult practicing necromancy, necrophagy, and necrophilia in 
France. Fourteen copies are known to exist, the most recent 
surfacing in 1906.
Sanity Loss: 1D10
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+8 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 36
Study: 22 weeks
Suggested Spells: Black Binding, Call/Dismiss Nyogtha, 
Call/Dismiss Shub-Niggurath, Contact Ghoul, 
Resurrection, Shrivelling, Summon/Bind Byakhee, 
Summon/Bind Dark Y oung, Voorish Sign.
William Tedworth, an eccentric         
occult scholar, claimed to have seen  
a copy of the Cthaat Aquadingen in the 
doctor’s library of Oakdeen Sanitarium 
in 1935. Due to the loss and damage of 
many records in the wake of the events 
of 1st January 1936, it is unknown 
whether Tedworth was a patient, 
visitor, or temporary consultant at the 
facility; the determination of which 
would shed light upon the veracity of 
his claim.

===== PDF page index 239 (rulebook p.239) =====
228 
Call of Cthulhu
De Vermiis Mysteriis
Latin, by Ludwig Prinn, 1542
Black letter folio printed in Cologne, Germany, in the same 
year. Suppressed by the Church. Fifteen copies have survived. 
In part discusses the Arab world, and things supernatural there. 
Sanity Loss: 2D6
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+8 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 36
Study: 48 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Contact Deity/Yig, Create Scrying Win-
dow, Create Zombie, Invoke Demon (Summon/Bind 
Byakhee), Invoke Child of the Goat (Summon/Bind 
Dark Y oung), Invoke Invisible Servant (Summon/
Bind Star Vampire), Mind Transfer, Voorish Sign.
Eltdown Shards 
English, by Rev. Arthur Brooke Winters-Hall, 1912
Questionable translation of mysterious hieroglyphs found 
on clay fragments in southern England, in an edition of 350 
pamphlets, 64 pages. Tells of beings that could exchange 
minds with others across space and time. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+8 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 33
Study: 6 weeks
Suggested Spells: Contact Yithian.
G’harne Fragments
English, by Sir Amery Wendy-Smith, 1919 (pub: 1931)
Scholarly study and translation of shards inscribed with 
curious dot patterns. Discusses the lost city of G’harne 
in great detail, including its location. The shards were 
discovered by Windrop in North Africa. The original edition 
was 958 copies, printed at the author’s expense as a humble 
sextodecimo (4.5" × 5.75"). 
Sanity Loss: 1D10
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+7 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 30
Study: 12 weeks
Suggested Spells: Contact Chthonian, Contact Elder Thing, 
Contact Shudde M’ ell, Red Sign of Shudde M’ ell.
The King in Yellow
English, translator unknown, c. 1895
The original is in French, apparently, but that edition 
was seized and destroyed by the Third Republic just after 
publication. The English edition is a thin black octavo 
volume, across the front cover of which is embossed a large 
Y ellow Sign. Until the book has been read, the Sign has no 
effect on the viewer, except to imbue a sense of curiosity. 
After reading the book (or after having contact with 
anything or anyone from Carcosa), viewing the sign costs 
0/1D6 Sanity points to see (for one time only). The text is an 
ambiguous, dreamlike play that opens readers to madness. 
Uniquely, readers cannot opt to disbelieve what is written 
here. Those of an artistic bent will feel compelled to reread 
the play. If the book results in insanity, the reader should 
become obsessed with Carcosa and the King in Y ellow (see 
The Y ellow Sign, page 322). 
Sanity Loss: 1D10 
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+4 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 15
Study: 1 week
Suggested Spells: none.
Liber Ivonis, Livre d’Ivon— see Book 
of Eibon
Divided into sixteen chapters, 
De Vermiis Mysteriis concerns itself  
with a varied assortment of topics,  
including divination arts, necromancy, the 
creation of familiars, as well as bizarre 
theories and descriptions of entities such 
as vampires, sprites, and elementals. Certain 
copies of the tome have large sections 
written in what is considered to be Ogham 
(Druidic runes). Some suspect the Ogham is 
a cipher used by Prinn to “hide” more revealing 
and blasphemous ideas. Rumors circulated 
in the early twentieth century concerning the 
Esoteric Order of Dagon, who were allegedly 
seeking an original copy of the book. It is 
believed that within the ciphered sections are 
formulae to hasten the metamorphosis of a 
human into a deep one. 
Comprising pottery shards discovered near Eltdown, Southern 
England, the Eltdown Shards were 
declared untranslatable by Dr. Woodford 
and Dalton (the first to attempt a 
translation). Subsequently, however, 
numerous manuscripts purporting to be    
translations have appeared, with the 
Winters-Hall version foremost among 
them. Winters-Hall suggests that the 
Shards are none other than the writings 
of the elder things, buried when England 
was still part of the super continent of 
Pangaea. Speculation against this theory 
has arisen from unnamed sources who 
contest that the script is that of the 
Great Race of Yith.
===== PDF page index 240 (rulebook p.240) =====
229 
chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore
Massa di Requiem Per Shuggay 
Italian, by Benvenuto Chieti Brodighera, 1768
An opera score and libretto never published and believed to 
have been performed only once. Deals with rape, incest and 
other degradations. Knowledgeable musicians pronounce 
portions of it unplayable. Copies are held by the British 
Museum, the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris, and probably 
the Vatican’s Z-collection.
Sanity Loss: 1D6
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+3 percentiles 
Mythos Rating: 12
Study: 2 weeks
Suggested Spells:  (performed with full orchestra) Call 
Azathoth is cast about midway through the third act.
Monstres and their Kynde
English, author unknown, 16th century
A single folio version of this handwritten book existed and 
that was stolen from the British Museum in 1898. Rumors 
of other copies continue to persist to this day, though none 
has been verified. Contains a jumble of topics drawn from 
the Necronomicon, Book of Eibon , and a variety of other 
tomes. Many entities are discussed, including Cthulhu, Y og-
Sothoth, and Lloigor, the twin of Zhar. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+6 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 24
Study: 36 weeks 
Suggested Spells:  Command Faceless One (Summon/
Bind Nightgaunt), Command Ice Demon (Sum -
mon/Bind Byakhee), Command Invisible Servant 
(Summon/Bind Star Vampire), Command Night 
Beast (Summon/Bind Hunting Horror), Command 
Star Walker (Summon/Bind Dimensional Sham -
bler), Enchant Knife, Enchant Pipes. 
Nameless Cults 
Three versions follow:
Unaussprechlichen Kulten
German, by Friedrich Wilhelm von Junzt, 1839
Properly known as Das Buch von den unaussprechlichen 
Kulten. A quarto, possibly printed in Hamburg. This 
volume, long referred to as the Black Book , tells of von 
Junzt’s connections to various cults and secret societies. 
Other editions are rumored. Six copies are known to be in 
major libraries in Europe and America. The original edition 
boasts the horrific engravings of Gunther Hasse. 
Sanity Loss: 2D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+10 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 45
Study: 52 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Approach Brother (Contact Ghoul), 
Barrier of Naach-Tith, Beckon Great One (Contact 
Dagon), Call Aether Devil (Contact Mi-Go), Call 
Forth the Sun (Call/Dismiss Azathoth), Call Forth 
Cyaegha (Call/Dismiss Cyaegha), Call Forth the 
Horned Man (Call/Dismiss Nyarlathotep), Call Forth 
That Which Should Not Be (Call/Dismiss Nyogtha), 
Call Forth the Woodland Goddess (Call/Dismiss 
Shub-Niggurath), Command Airy Travellers (Sum-
mon/Bind Byakhee), Command the Trees (Summon/
Bind Dark Y oung), Command the Unknown (Call/
Dismiss Ghatanothoa), Contact Children of the Deep 
(Contact Deep Ones), Revivify (Resurrection).
Nameless Cults
English, translator unknown, published 1845
An unauthorized translation published by Bridewell of 
England (probably London) in an octavo edition. At least 
twenty copies are held in various collections. Badly flawed 
text. 
Sanity Loss: 2D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +4/+8 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 36
Study: 48 weeks 
Suggested Spells: as per Unaussprechlichen Kulten, but 
most of these spell versions are incomplete or faulty.
A play shrouded in mystery and  
sorrow, The King in Yellow appears to 
bring only madness and death to those 
who possess the volume. Although the  
playwright remains unknown, some 
maintain it was written by Christopher 
Marlowe (author of Doctor Faustus, as 
well as the lurid The Massacre at Paris). 
Apart from his known works, Marlowe is 
also famous for his mysterious death. 
An arrest warrant for Marlowe was 
issued, with no reason given other than 
allegations of blasphemy for a manuscript 
containing “vile heretical concepts”. He 
was taken for questioning, although 
(strangely) no record exists of the  
interview. Ten days later Marlowe was 
stabbed (above the right eye, killing him 
instantly) by Ingram Frizer. Some believe 
the blasphemous manuscript to be The 
King in Yellow and the real cause of 
Marlowe’s death.

===== PDF page index 241 (rulebook p.241) =====
230 
Call of Cthulhu
Nameless Cults
English, translator unknown, published 1909
An expurgated version of the faulty Bridewell text, published 
by Golden Goblin Press, New Y ork. Contains only descriptions 
of spells, not the complete rituals of the earlier editions. This 
edition can possibly be found in used bookstores.
Sanity Loss: 2D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+6 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 27
Study: 30 weeks
Suggested Spells: none
The Necronomicon 
Five versions follow.
Al Azif
Arabic, by Abdul al-Hazrad (Abd al-Azrad), c. 730 AD
Original form is unknown, but numerous manuscript 
versions were long circulated between medieval scholars. As 
early as the 12th century, this version was referred to as lost. 
An immense compendium touching on nearly every aspect of 
the Mythos, and a reference including charts and star maps. 
Sanity Loss: 2D10 
Cthulhu Mythos: +6/+12 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 54
Study: 68 weeks 
Suggested Spells: Call/Dismiss Azathoth, Call/Dismiss 
Cthugha, Call/Dismiss Hastur, Call/Dismiss Nyogtha, 
Call/Dismiss Shub-Niggurath, Call/Dismiss Y og-So-
thoth, Contact Ghoul, Contact Deity/Nyarlathotep, 
Contact Sand Dweller, Dominate, Dread Curse of 
Azathoth, Dust of Suleiman, Elder Sign, Powder of 
Ibn-Ghazi, Resurrection, Shrivelling, Summon/Bind 
Byakhee, Summon/Bind Fire Vampire, Summon/
Bind Servitor of the Outer Gods, Voorish Sign.
Necronomicon
Greek, translated by Theodoras Philetas, c. 950 AD
Early manuscript versions are unknown. A small printing 
in (Florence?) Italy in a folio edition was suppressed by the 
Church; it lacked any drawings, maps, or charts. Last known 
copy burned in Salem, 1692. 
Sanity Loss: 2D10
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+12 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 51
Study: 68 weeks 
Suggested Spells: same as Al Azif.
Necronomicon
Latin, translated by Olaus Wormius, 1228 AD
First circulated in manuscript form, then printed in Germany 
(late 15th century) as a black-letter folio. A second, nearly 
identical edition was published in Spain in the early 17th 
century. One copy of the former edition and four copies of 
the latter are known to exist. 
Sanity Loss: 2D10
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+11 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 48
Study: 66 weeks 
Suggested Spells: same as Al Azif.
Necronomicon
English, translated by Dr. John Dee, 1586
An accurate but expurgated version of the Greek translation. 
Never printed; exists in bound manuscript form only. Three 
nearly-complete copies are known. 
Sanity Loss: 2D10
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+10 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 45 
Study: 50 weeks
Suggested Spells: Call Forth the Angel Y azrael (Call/
Dismiss Y og-Sothoth), Call Forth the Lord of the 
Pit (Call/Dismiss Nyogtha), Command the Angel 
Dilyah (Summon/Bind Servitor of the Outer Gods), 
Consult Dark Servant (Contact Ghoul), Consult Y e 
Spirit of the Earth (Contact Nyarlathotep), Domi -
nate, Dust of Suleiman, Elder Sign, Powder of Ibn-
Ghazi, Voorish Sign.
Sussex Manuscript
English, translated by Baron Frederic, 1597 
A muddled, incomplete translation of the Latin 
Necronomicon, printed in Sussex, England, in an octavo 
edition. Properly known as the Cultus Maleficarum. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+5 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 21
Study: 36 weeks 
Suggested Spells: same as Al Azif, but possibly danger -
ously flawed in form and intent.

===== PDF page index 242 (rulebook p.242) =====
231 
chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore
The Necronomicon
Every tome has its own history and the Keeper is invited to 
use this entry regarding the Necronomicon as inspiration for 
his or her own stories of other tomes or similar artifacts.
While more ancient works are hinted at, in human 
languages it is the Necronomicon that best relates the reach 
and meaning of the Cthulhu Mythos.
The Necronomicon is encyclopedic and baffling, containing 
deep Mythos magic and knowledge, including a chant to Yog-
Sothoth which can open the Way to this world, information 
on the powder of Ibn-Ghazi, and a description of the Voorish 
Sign. The tome also discusses the nature of existence, details 
many locations and places (some not of this Earth), and 
provides grim descriptions of some Mythos entities. Allusions 
are definitions, inflections are explanations, wishes are 
proofs, and decoration and design are indistinguishable. The 
vocabulary is as interior as that of a dream. The Necronomicon 
is the gateway to insanity, the path through which humans 
pass, metamorphose, and emerge unrecognizable.
History 
The original version of the Necronomicon, known as the Kitab 
Al Azif, was written around 730 A.D. in Damascus by the Arab, 
Abdul Al-Hazred (Abd al-Azrad). A student of magic as well as 
an astronomer, poet, philosopher, and scientist, al-Azrad was 
born around 700 A.D. in Sanaa, Yemen. Before composing his 
great work he spent years visiting the ruins of Babylon, the pits 
of Memphis, and the great southern desert of Arabia.
He died in Damascus in 738, according to his 12th-century 
biographer, Ebn Khallikan, devoured in broad daylight by an 
invisible demon. Manuscripts of the Al Azif circulated secretly 
among philosophers and scientists of the age, however it was 
not until the year 950 that the work was translated into Greek 
by the Byzantine Theodorus Philetas, who renamed it the 
Necronomicon. Numerous copies of Philetas’ manuscript were 
made. The increased circulation of the blasphemous tome 
led to its eventual condemnation in 1050 by the Patriarch 
Michael of Constantinople. Many copies were confiscated 
and destroyed, their owners suffering harsh penalties.
In 1228, Olaus Wormius effected a Latin translation of 
the Greek version, all copies of the original Arabic having by 
this time been lost. Its rapid circulation among philosophical 
circles led to its banning in 1232, both the Latin and Greek 
versions placed on the Index Expurgatorius by Pope Gregory 
IX. Olaus did not re-title the Greek Necronomicon, and the 
work is thereafter commonly referred to by that name.
The year 1454 saw the first practical printing press using 
moveable type and, before the end of the century, a black-
letter version of the Latin Necronomicon had been printed in 
Germany, probably in Mainz. The text does not identify the 
date or place of printing.
In the early sixteenth century, probably before 1510, a 
version of the Greek translation was printed in Italy. Although 
again lacking any identifying marks, this version is generally 
believed to have come from the press of Aldus Manutius, 
founder of the Aldine Press, famous for its printing of unedited 
Greek and Latin texts.
In 1586 an English translation of the Necronomicon was 
produced by Dr. John Dee, mathematician, astrologer, and 
physician to Queen Elizabeth of England. Never published, 
Dee’s translation is believed to have been made from a 
Greek edition discovered by the doctor during his travels in 
Eastern Europe. Although accurate, it is incomplete, partially 
expurgated by its translator.
A second printing of the Latin version was made in Spain 
in the early seventeenth century. As usual, the printer is 
unidentified but the poorer cut of the type distinguishes it 
from the finer German work. It is in all other ways faithful to 
the earlier edition.
Other Versions 
Other versions and partial copies of the Necronomicon exist. 
The Sussex Manuscript, also known as the Cultus Maleficarum, 
is an English translation made by a Baron Frederic from the 
Latin text, published in Sussex in 1597. The muddled and 
incomplete Al-Azif—Ye Booke of ye Arab, written in provincial 
English, was made in the late sixteenth century and circulated 
in hand-copied manuscript. The 116-page medieval Voynich 
Manuscript, presently in the collection of the University of 
Pennsylvania, is written in Greek and Latin using Arab script. 
Surviving Copies 
Condemned and destroyed by the Church, only five copies 
of the Necronomicon are known to exist today, although 
an unknown number of copies may still be held in private 
collections. Copies that reach the open market are usually 
purchased by libraries or private collectors. The resultant 
increase in value has driven the price beyond the range of 
most serious students of the occult. Few can afford to obtain 
their own copies of this dark and powerful book, and, given 
the value and fragile conditions of the existing copies, few 
public institutions allow unrestricted access.
The documented extant copies are all Latin versions, four 
from the surreptitious 17th-century Spanish printing and the 
fifth a single surviving specimen of the fine 16th-century 
German edition. The four remnants of the edition printed in 
Spain are presently held in the collections of the Bibliothèque 
Nationale in Paris, the Miskatonic University Library in 
Arkham, the Widener Library at Harvard, and the library of 
the University of Buenos Aires. The precious single copy of 
the edition printed in Germany resides in the British Museum 
in London.
Continued on following page
===== PDF page index 243 (rulebook p.243) =====
232 
Call of Cthulhu
Although the last known copy in Greek is believed to have 
perished in flames during the chaos of the Salem witch trials 
in Massachusetts, rumors of other Greek copies occasionally 
surface. The most recent of these claimed that a copy was 
owned by the New York artist Richard Upton Pickman. If true, 
the book apparently disappeared along with the artist in 1926.
Handmade copies of the Dee version, most of them 
damaged and incomplete, are still occasionally unearthed. 
The most recent find was made by Miskatonic University, 
which now has a nearly complete Dee Necronomicon in its 
enviable collection. The decidedly less rare Sussex Manuscript 
also can be found in Miskatonic’s collection and in many 
other large libraries as well. It is generally believed that no 
copies of the Arabic original have survived to the present day, 
although persistent rumors suggest that a copy surfaced in 
San Francisco shortly before the disastrous earthquake and fire 
of 1906. The claim that an Arabic copy is part of the collection 
in the British Museum has been recently disproved.
Physical Descriptions 
All known printed editions of the Necronomicon are folio-
sized. The Latin editions printed in Spain and Germany 
measure 18 by 11-1/2 inches and contain 802 pages, one 
leaf being bound in as a tabbed insert. Records suggest that 
the Greek version was several pages longer. The type style 
is black-letter gothic and numerous woodcuts illustrate the 
text. Bindings, as with all books of this period, are individual, 
reflecting the tastes of the books’ original owners. 
The Necronomicon found in the British Museum is in a 
15th-century leather binding still in fair condition. Printed in 
Germany, the text is in good condition but lamentably lacks 
seven different leaves, each cut away and removed with great 
care. This volume was among the three libraries of books 
bequeathed to the people of England that led to the founding 
of the British Museum in 1753.
The copy found in the Bibliothèque Nationale is in 
poor condition, bound in the cheap, crumbling pasteboards 
common to the era. The text is in similarly bad condition, 
with many torn pages and several pages missing altogether. 
Other pages are indecipherable, badly stained by what some 
identify as blood. The acquisition of the book is shrouded in 
mystery, the volume deposited at the front desk in 1811 by a 
furtive man of foreign caste. The mysterious donor was found 
a day later in a rat-infested apartment, a victim of poison.
The University of Buenos Aires’ copy is said to have come 
to South America in the late 17th century. Although the text 
is in only fair condition, it is unique for its odd marginal notes, 
written in unknown glyphs.
The Widener Library at Harvard contains a Necronomicon 
of poor condition. Its binding is original, but badly cracked 
and split. The text is complete but many pages have separated 
and others are crumbling. Restoration efforts are underway. 
The book was part of the library of Harry Elkins Widener, 
American millionaire, and it is said that he obtained the 
volume shortly before he boarded the Titanic in 1912. 
The copy at Miskatonic University was obtained late in 
the last century by a young Dr. Armitage, then only recently 
hired by the school. Purchased from the private collection of 
Providence businessman Whipple Phillips, the Miskatonic’s 
edition of the Necronomicon was rebound, probably in the 
early 18th century, in sumac-tanned goatskin. A false title, 
Qanoon-e-Islam, is embossed in gold on the front cover. The 
text is complete and in fair to good condition.
Continued from following page

===== PDF page index 244 (rulebook p.244) =====
233 
chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore
During the federal investigation of 
 Innsmouth in 1927-8, copies of the       
R’lyeh Text were seized. During 
 interviews with those apprehended in the 
raids, it became apparent that the slim 
book was considered by the inhabitants of 
Innsmouth to be an important holy text. 
Further questioning of reluctant prisoners 
elicited information suggesting that the book 
contained the proper rites and obeisances to 
“Him in the Water” and that (more 
 fancifully), the book held a secret that 
 allowed men to speak with the fish and 
breathe under the water.
No record exists of what happened 
to the numerous volumes of the R’lyeh 
Text seized during the investigation. It is 
assumed they were destroyed.
People of the Monolith
English, by Justin Geoffrey, 1926
A volume of poems, 4" × 6.75", bound in dark red buckram at 
Erebus Press, Monmouth, Illinois, in an edition of 1200 copies. 
The title poem is acknowledged as Geoffrey’s masterwork. 
Sanity Loss: 1D3
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+2 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 9
Study: 1 week 
Suggested Spells: none
Pnakotic Manuscripts
English, author and translator unknown, 15th century
Five bound manuscript versions (partial copies of a greater 
work, now lost) of this book are catalogued in Europe and 
America. The apparent precursor volume, the Pnakotica, 
was written in classical Greek, and that book may trace its 
origins to the pre-human crinoids who seeded life on Earth. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +3/+7 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 30
Study: 45 weeks
Suggested Spells: Contact Winged Thing (Elder Thing).
Ponape Scripture
English, by Captain Abner Ezekiel Hoag, 1734. 
Published posthumously c. 1795, in Boston, as a sextodecimo, 
4" × 6.75", but inferior in accuracy and completeness to 
Hoag’s manuscript, copies of which purportedly still exist. 
Details a South Sea islander cult of humans who worship 
and breed with the deep ones.
Sanity Loss: 1D6 
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+4 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 15
Study: 10 weeks
Suggested Spells: the printed version has no spells. The 
manuscript original contains Contact Deep One, 
Contact Father Dagon, Contact Mother Hydra.
Revelations of Gla'aki
English, by various authors, 1842
Nine folio volumes were published by subscription, the last 
in 1865. Since then, three more volumes are said to have been 
composed and privately circulated. Copies of the original 
nine folio volumes are held by many major libraries. Each 
volume is by a different cultist, discussing a different aspect 
of Gla'aki, associated entities, and their cults. This version of 
the text was apparently expurgated, but much information 
survives. 
Sanity Loss: 2D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+10 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 45
Study: 32 weeks 
Suggested Spells:  Call/Dismiss Azathoth, Call/Dismiss 
Daoloth, Call/Dismiss Shub-Niggurath, Contact 
Deity (Eihort), Contact Deity (Gla'aki), Green Decay.
R’lyeh Text
Chinese, author unknown, c. 300 BC
Supposedly the clay tablet originals have been destroyed, but 
scroll copies and recent English and German translations are 
said to exist. The text apparently concerns Dagon, Hydra, 
star-spawn, Zoth-Ommog, Ghatanothoa, and Cthulhu, and 
tells of the sinking of Mu and R’lyeh.
Sanity Loss: 2D6
Cthulhu Mythos: +5/+10 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 45
Study: 54 weeks
Suggested Spells: Call Cyaegha, Contact Deity/Cthulhu, 
Contact Deep Ones, Contact Father Dagon, Contact 
Mother Hydra, Wave of Oblivion.
The Revelations of Gla'aki are 
alleged to be the secret writings 
of a cult operating in the Severn 
River Valley, England. While nine 
volumes are known to exist, 
rumors continue to circulate 
of twelve volume sets—these          
additional volumes apparently 
containing the most secret         
aspects of the cult’s practices 
and rituals.
===== PDF page index 245 (rulebook p.245) =====
234 
Call of Cthulhu
Seven Cryptical Books of Hsan
Chinese, written by Hsan the Greater, c. 2nd century AD 
Seven scrolls, each on a different topic. An English translation, 
Seven Cryptical Books of Earth , is said to exist. The books 
discuss elements of the Mythos of particular importance or 
interest to those who live in the Middle Kingdom. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+6 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 24
Study: 40 weeks 
Suggested Spells:  Call Down Spirit (Summon/Bind 
Byakhee), Call Forth the Earth Spirit (Contact 
Chthonian), Contact Ghoul, Contact Hound of Tin-
dalos, Contact Deity/Nyarlathotep, Door to Kadath 
(a Gate to Kadath), Restore Life (Resurrection).
Thaumaturgical Prodigies In The  
New-England Canaan
English, by Rev. Ward Phillips, 1788? 
Published in two editions, the second in Boston, 1801. 
Primitive American octavo in imitation black letter. The 
interiors of the editions are the same, except for changes in 
printer, place of printing and edition date. Commonly found 
in major libraries and historical society libraries in New 
England. Describes the blasphemies of witches, warlocks, 
shamans, and other Colonial-era evildoers. Details of events 
in and around Billington’s Woods. 
Sanity Loss: 1D6
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+3 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 12
Study: 8 weeks 
Suggested Spells: none, but annotations by Rev. Phillips 
in his personal copy reveal Call/Dismiss Ithaka 
(Ithaqua), Contact Deity/Narlato (Nyarlathotep), 
Contact Deity/Sadogowah (Tsathoggua), Contact 
Deity/Y ogge Sothyothe (Y og-Sothoth), Elder Sign.
True Magick
English, by Theophilus Wenn, 17th century
A small and crumbling hand-bound manuscript, nonetheless 
describable as a veritable encyclopedia of Devil’s lore. 
Sanity Loss: 1D8
Cthulhu Mythos: +2/+4 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 18
Study: 24 weeks 
Suggested Spells:  Call for Spirit of the Air (Summon/
Bind Star Vampire), Call Forth the One (Summon/
Bind Servitor of the Outer Gods), Call Forth the 
Winged One (Summon/Bind Byakhee), Speak with 
the Dark One (Contact Deity/Nyogtha).
Zanthu Tablets
English, by Prof. Harold Hadley Copeland, 1916
A brochure subtitled “ A Conjectural Translation” printed in 
400 copies. Translates carvings found on black jade tablets 
drawn up from the Pacific Ocean by fishermen. The author 
claims the carvings are hieratic Naacal, the high language 
of ancient Mu. The brochure describes the worship of 
Ghatanothoa, Shub-Niggurath, and Cthulhu.
Sanity Loss: 1D6
Cthulhu Mythos: +1/+2 percentiles
Mythos Rating: 9
Study: 8 weeks 
Suggested Spells:  the text is partially expurgated and 
contains no spells. The original Muvian tables con -
tain Contact Deity/Cthulhu, Ghatanothoa, Lloigor, 
Yuggya, and Zoth-Ommog.
Occult Books
Owners of Mythos tomes are likely also to own occult (non-
Mythos) volumes.
An occult book usually adds at least one point to the 
Occult skill after reading. There are thousands of occult 
volumes. Here is a small sampling for Keepers to use on the 
bookshelves of libraries, collectors, and cults.
Reading an occult book usually costs no Sanity. 
Otherwise the same rules apply to occult books as to Mythos 
books. No indication for time of reading has been given; the 
Keeper should assign the relative interval he or she deems 
appropriate to the book.
Keepers are free to add a Mythos spell in a margin or on 
a flyleaf (written the crabbed handwriting of some scholar 
or cultist) if they think it appropriate, but (except for the 
Malleus Maleficarum) the tone of these volumes is often 
anything but evil or dangerous.
Beatus Methodivo
Latin, attributed to St. Methodius of Olympus, c. 300 AD
Of Gnostic complexion, this relatively short work is written 
as a prophetic apocalypse. It foresees the history of the world. 
It recounts how Seth sought a new country in the East and 
came to the country of the initiates, how the children of Cain 
instituted a system of black magic in India. 
Sanity Loss: none
Occult: +2 percentiles
The Emerald Tablet
Many languages, apparently from a Phoenician original, 
author or authors unknown, c. 200 AD
The central alchemical text for medieval Europe, mercifully 
short but as cryptic as the Tao Te Ching of classical China. 
Sanity Loss: none
Occult: +1 percentile.

===== PDF page index 246 (rulebook p.246) =====
235 
chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore

===== PDF page index 247 (rulebook p.247) =====
236 
Call of Cthulhu
The Golden Bough
English, by Sir George Frazer, 1890, in two volumes
An expanded thirteen-volume edition was published 1911-
1915. A classic work of anthropology exploring the evolution 
of magical, religious, and scientific thought. An abridged 
version is available in most U.S. libraries. 
Sanity Loss: 1D2
Occult: +5 percentiles
I Ching
Classical Mandarin and many translations, including English 
(circa 2000 BC onwards, modern English translations 
available) 
One of the five classics of Confucian China. A subtle and 
poetical system of divination easily applied but capable of 
deep situational allusion. 
Sanity Loss: none
Occult: +8 percentiles
Isis Unveiled
English, by Madame Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, 1877
A two-volume set comprising the author’s response to 
materialism and the arrogance of contemporary religious 
and scientific communities. The contents (to name but a 
few) also include sections on mesmerism, psychometry, the 
beings who inhabit ethereal space, and talismans.
Sanity Loss: none
Occult: +6 percentiles
The Key of Solomon
Various languages from Latin original, 14th century AD
Claimed to be written by King Solomon. Composed of two 
books, the first indicating how to avoid drastic mistakes 
when dealing with spirits and the second discussing the 
magical arts, including many complex rituals. 
Sanity Loss: none
Occult: +5 percentiles
Malleus Maleficarum
Various languages from Latin, by Sprenger and Kramer, 1486 
AD
Also known as the “Hammer of Witches” . A guide for 
inquisitors in the Middle Ages on the identification and 
torturous persuasion of witches. This terrible book helped 
send approximately nine million people to their deaths. 
The German translation of 1906 has the excellent title Der 
Hexenhammer. 
Sanity Loss: none
Occult: +3 percentiles
Oracles of Nostradamus
Various languages, by Michel de Nostradame [Nostradamus], 
1555-1557
Contains about a thousand four-line verses, purporting 
to be prophecies concerning human events until the year 
3797 AD. The prophecies are nonspecific and imagistic, 
lending themselves to all sorts of applications. Numerous 
interpretations have been made for many of these prophecies. 
Sanity Loss: none
Occult: +1 percentile
The Witch-Cult in Western Europe
English, by Dr. Margaret Murray, 1921
A modern English octavo with dust jacket; many editions and 
printings since. Connects the so-called covens of the Middle 
Ages with pre-Christian beliefs surviving as superstitions 
or, in a more organized sense, driven underground by 
the Church. This volume is often found in libraries and 
bookstores. 
Sanity Loss: none
Occult: +1 percentile
The Zohar
Aramaic, many editions and translated to Latin, German, 
English, French, etc., by Moses de Leon, 1280 AD
The fundamental work of medieval Jewish mystical thought, 
representing the effort to know or to reach God through 
contemplation and revelation.
Sanity Loss: 1/1D3+1
Occult: +7 percentiles.

===== PDF page index 248 (rulebook p.248) =====
237 
chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore
Title Language Date Author Wks. SAN CMI CMF MR
Al Azif Arabic c. 730 Abdul al-Hazrad 68 2D10 +6 +12 54
Azathoth and Others English 1919 Edward Derby 1 1D4 +1 +3 12
Black Book of the Skull Greek J’ cak Igguratian 29 1D8 +2 +4 18
Black God of Madness English 1930s Amadaeus Carson 7 1D6 +1 +3 12
Black Rites Egyptian Luveh-Keraphf 41 2D6 +3 +8 33
Black Sutra Burmese c. 700 U Pao 18 1D8 +1 +4 15
Black Tome Latin Alsophocus 37 2D6 +3 +7 30
Book of Dzyan English unknown 14 1D6 +3 +6 27
Book of Eibon English 15th C. unknown 32 2D4 +3 +8 33
Book of Iod ancient 
tongue
unknown 51 2D6 +4 +8 36
Book of Iod English trans. Johann Negus 10 1D6 +1 +3 12
Book of Skelos Aklo unknown 54 2D6 +3 +7 30
Cabala of Saboth Greek 1686 unknown 16 1D6 +1 +2 9
Celaeno Fragments English 1915 Laban Shrewsbury 15 1D8 +3 +6 27
Chronike von Nath German Rudolf Y ergler 22 1D8 +2 +4 18
Confessions of the Mad Monk 
Clithanus
Latin c. 400 Clithanus 29 2D6 +3 +6 27
Cthaat Aquadingen English 14th C. unknown 29 2D4 +2 +4 18
Cthaat Aquadingen Latin 11-12th C. unknown 46 2D8 +4 +9 39
Cthulhu in the Necronomicon English 1915 Laban Shrewsbury 14 1D6 +2 +4 18
Cthonic Revelations Laotian Thanang Phram 18 1D8 +2 +5 21
Cultes des Goules French 1702 Francois-Honore 
Balfour
22 1D10 +4 +8 36
Daemonolatreia English 1595 Remigius 28 1D8 +2 +6 24
De Vermiis Mysteriis Latin 1542 Ludwig Prinn 48 2D6 +4 +8 36
Dhol Chants German 1890s Heinrich 
Zimmerman
17 1D8 +2 +5 21
Table XI: Mythos Tomes
Key
Title—Name of the book.
Language—Language the book is predominantly written in.
Date—Date when book was written (if known).
Author—Book’s writer (if known).
Wks.—Number of weeks required for full study.
SAN—Sanity points loss from reading the book.
CMI—Cthulhu Mythos Initial – number of Cthulhu Mythos skill points gained from an initial reading.
CMF—Cthulhu Mythos Full – number of Cthulhu Mythos skill points gained from a full study.
MR—Mythos Rating – reader may gain maximum CMF if their Cthulhu Mythos skills points are below the book’s 
rating (see page 175).

===== PDF page index 249 (rulebook p.249) =====
238 
Call of Cthulhu
Mum-Rath Papyri Latin Ibn Shoddathua 10 1D6 +1 +3 12
Naacal Key English Churchward 2 1D2 0 +1 3
Nameless Cults English 1845 unknown 48 2D8 +4 +8 36
Nameless Cults English 1909 unknown 30 2D8 +3 +6 27
Necrolatry German 1702 Ivor Gorstadt 20 2D6 +4 +8 36
Necronomicon Greek c. 950 Theodoras Philetas 68 2D10 +5 +12 51
Necronomicon Latin 1228 Olaus Wormius 66 2D10 +5 +11 48
Necronomicon English 1586 John Dee 50 2D10 +5 +10 45
Night-Gaunt English Edgar Gordon 4 1D3 0 +1 3
The Occult Foundation English c. 1980 J. C. Wassermann 16 1D6 +1 +4 15
Of Evil Sorceries Done in New 
England
English c.1600 unknown 9 1D6 +1 +3 12
Othuum Omnicia Latin unknown 12 1D4 +1 +2 9
Parchments of Pnom Hyperborean Pnom 31 2D6 +3 +8 33
People of the Monolith English 1926 Justin Geoffrey 1 1D3 +1 +2 9
Title Language Date Author Wks SAN CMI CMF MR
Dwellers in the Depths French Gaston Le Fé 12 1D8 +2 +6 24
Eltdown Shards English 1912 Arthur B  
Winters-Hall
6 1D8 +3 +8 33
Ethics of Ygor Latin unknown 13 1D6 +1 +3 12
Fischbuch German 1598 Konrad von Gerner 8 1D4 +1 +2 9
Fourth Book of D’harsis English D’harsis 42 2D6 +3 +8 33
Geph Transcriptions English unknown 20 1D8 +2 +5 21
G’harne Fragments English Amery Wendy-
Smith
12 1D10 +3 +7 30
Ghorl Nigral Muvian Naacal Zakuba 46 2D8 +4 +10 42
Green Book English unknown 50 2D8 +4 +9 39
Hydrophinnae Latin Mr. Gantley 7 1D4 +1 +2 9
Ilarnek Papyri English unknown 15 1D8 +2 +4 18
In Pressured Places English Hartrack 3 1D6 +1 +4 15
Invocations to Dagon English Asaph Waite 16 1D8 +3 +6 27
Johansen Narrative English Gustaf Johansen 6 1D6 +1 +3 12
King in Y ellow, The English 1895 unknown 1 1D10 +1 +4 15
Legends of Liqualia English Oswald 9 1D4 +1 +3 12
Liber Damnatus  
Damnationum
English 1647 Janus Aquaticus 34 1D8 +3 +7 30
Liber Ivonis Latin 9th C. Caius Phillipus 36 2D4 +4 +9 39
Life of Eibon French Cyron 8 1D4 +1 +2 9
Livre D’Ivon French 13th C. Gaspard du Nord 36 2D4 +4 +8 36
Magic and the Black Arts English Kane 12 1D6 +1 +4 15
Marvels of Science English Morryster 11 1D4 +1 +2 9
Massa di Requiem 
Per Shuggay
Italian 1768 B Chieti 
Brodighera
2 1D6 +1 +3 12
Monstres and their Kynde English 16th C. unknown 36 1D8 +2 +6 24
===== PDF page index 250 (rulebook p.250) =====
239 
chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore
R’lyeh Text Chinese c. 300 unknown 54 2D8 +5 +10 45
Saducismus Triumphatus English  1681 Joseph Glanvill 6 1D6 +1 +3 12
Sapientia Maglorum Latin Ostanes 40 2D6 +3 +7 30
Saracenic Rituals English 19th C. Clergyman X 6 1D3 +1 +2 9
Secret Mysteries of Asia, with a 
Commentary on the  
Ghorl Nigral 
German 1847 Gottfried Mulder 16 1D8 +2 +5 21
Secret Watcher, The English Halpin Chalmers 10 1D4 +1 +3 12
Seven Cryptical Books of Hsan Chinese 2nd C. Hsan the Greater 40 1D8 +2 +6 24
Song of Yste Greek Dirka Family 11 1D6 +1 +4 15
Soul of Chaos English Edgar Gordon 7 1D4 +1 +3 12
Sussex Manuscript English 1597 Baron Frederic 36 1D6 +2 +5 21
Testament of Carnamagos Greek 12th C. Carnamagos 23 1D6 +2 +4 18
Thaumaturgical Prodigies in the 
New-England Canaan
English 1788 Ward Philips 8 1D6 +1 +3 12
True Magick English 17th C. Theophilus Wenn 24 1D8 +2 +4 18
Tunneler Below, The English 1936 Georg Reuter 2 1D3 +1 +2 9
Tuscan Rituals Italian unknown 3 1D3 0 +2  6
Unaussprechlichen Kulten German 1839 F W von Junzt 52 2D8 +5 +10 45
Unter Zee Kulten German 17th C. Graf Gauberg 17 1D6 +2 +4 18
Uralteschrecken German 19th C. Graf von 
Konnenberg 
22 1D6 +2 +4 18
Visions from Y addith English 1927 Ariel Prescott 1 1D4 +1 +3 12
Von denen Verdammten Oder German Karaj Heinz Vogel 24 2D6 +4 +8 36
Von denen Verdammten German 
(repr.)
1907 Edith Brendall 10 1D6 +1 +4 15
Watchers on the Other Side English 1940s Nayland Colum 2 1D4 0 +3 9
We Pass from View English 1964 Roland Franklyn 1 1D6 +1 +3 12
Yhe Ritual Egyptian Niggoum-Zhog 14 1D8 +3 +6 27
Yuggya Chants English Unknown 11 1D6 +1 +3 12
Zanthu Tablets English 1916 H Hadley 
Copeland
8 1D6 +1 +2 9
Title Language Date Author Wks SAN CMI CMF MR
Pnakotic Manuscripts English 15th C. unknown 45 1D8 +3 +7 30
Polynesian Mythology, with a Note on 
the Cthulhu Legend-Cycle
English 1906 Harold H. Copeland 8 1D3 +1 +2 9
Ponape Scripture 1734 Abner Ezekiel 10 1D6 +1 +4 15
Prehistoric Pacific in the Light  
of the Ponape Scripture
English 1911 Harold H. 
Copeland 
7 1D4 +1 +3 12
Prehistory in the Pacific: A 
Preliminary Investigation
English 1902 Harold H. 
Copeland
4 1D2 0 +1 3
Reflections English Ibn Schacabao 27 1D8 +2 +6 24
Remnants of Lost Empires German 1809 Otto Dostmann 5 1D3 0 +2 6
Revelations of Gla'aki English 1842 various authors 32 2D6 +5 +10 45
Revelations of Hali English 1913 E. S. Bayrolles 5 1D4 +1 +3 12