
===== PDF page index 287 (rulebook p.287) =====

===== PDF page index 288 (rulebook p.288) =====

===== PDF page index 289 (rulebook p.289) =====
278 
Call of Cthulhu
his chapter provides a selection of monsters, 
beasts, and alien beings for use within Call 
of Cthulhu . The chapter is divided into four 
sections, each focusing on a specific monster 
type: Cthulhu Mythos entities, Cthulhu 
Mythos gods, classic monsters, and beasts. The selection 
of monsters across the sections is not exhaustive—every 
horror fan can probably think of some terror not present. 
The ones here are those found in the most important stories, 
frequently appear in scenarios, or are commonly referred to. 
Many more can be found in the Call of Cthulhu supplement 
Malleus Monstrorum, also from Chaosium.
About the Entries
Most monsters and entities have characteristics including 
STR, CON, SIZ, POW , INT, and DEX. However many do not 
have an APP or EDU, since these qualities are meaningless 
in such alien and horrific creatures. Keepers have full reign 
to alter, modify, and rethink these entries. Lovecraft did not 
codify the monsters in his stories, so neither should you if 
you wish to present dramatically different versions.
These are creatures of nightmare, and individual 
monsters may vary from one encounter to the next in their 
characteristics and abilities. The characteristic values given for 
each monster are those of an average specimen. As Keeper, 
you have the option to roll an individual monster’s statistics, 
or choose to create a lesser or greater specimen using the dice 
ranges as a guide to generating characteristic values.
Only full characteristic values ( i.e. no halves and fifths) 
are listed for monsters. Non-player character and monster 
characteristics are primarily used to set the difficulty level 
of players’ skill rolls. As Keeper, you may occasionally need 
to figure out one-half or one-fifth of a particular monster’s 
characteristic value, but this will be unusual.
Monster Sizes
Certain monsters are staggeringly huge when compared to the 
human scale, just take a look at the diagram below!
Size Comparison 
Charts
The diagrams below illustrate 
various denizens of the Cthulhu 
Mythos, providing some idea of 
the relative size of these  creatures. Note the various 
unfortunate investigators  splattered about the monsters. 
Some of these creatures,  notably Cthulhu, are able to 
alter their mass and size at will; 
the illustration shows only one 
version of such images.
===== PDF page index 290 (rulebook p.290) =====
279 
chapter 14: monsters , beasts , and alien gods
Builds
Along with the characteristic of SIZ, 
each monster, character, and vehicle has 
a build value. This figure provides an at a 
glance guide to scale. The average human 
has a Build of 0, with the full range 
extending from –2 (children and small 
persons) to 2 (heavyweight boxers for 
example). The build scale is not linear; 
combining 5 motorcycles would not 
create something larger than a truck. 
When considering what a being can 
lift or throw, use a standard human as 
a guide. The average human of Build 0 
could lift someone of equal build off the 
floor, perhaps carrying them over their 
shoulder. Something of 1 build smaller 
could easily be lifted, and a thing of 2 
builds smaller could be thrown. With a 
strain, a human of Build 0 might just lift 
a person of Build 1. The most a person 
of Build 0 might do to a person of Build 
2 is to unbalance them or disarm them.
Using this as a guide, it becomes 
simple to figure the relative capability of 
a monster to lift and throw things—for 
example, whether a monster is large 
enough to throw a car.
Table XV: Comparative Builds
Build Natural World Mythos Inanimate
– 2 Child, fruit bat Fire vampire
– 1 Large dog
0 Average human  
adult, wolf
Servant of Gla'aki
1 Deep one Light motorcycle
2 Large human, Lion Byakhee
3 Black bear, gorilla Formless spawn Heavy motorcycle
4 Cape buffalo, horse Elder things Economy car
5 Dark Y oung Standard car
6 Adult Chthonian Pickup truck
7 African elephant Dagon 6 ton truck
9 Shoggoth 18-wheeler truck
11 Star-spawn of 
Cthulhu
22 Blue Whale Great Cthulhu
65 Dhole Battleship

===== PDF page index 291 (rulebook p.291) =====
280 
Call of Cthulhu
Quick-reference Build comparison:
i If a target is 2 builds smaller: it can be thrown.
i If a target is 1 build smaller: it can be lifted with ease.
i If a target is of equal build: it can be carried for a 
short time.
i If a target is 1 build larger: it can barely be lifted.
i If a target is 2 builds larger: it cannot be lifted, but 
might be unbalanced or disarmed.
Playing Monsters  
Effectively
Monsters are, for the most part, not mindless animals. Many 
are of equal or greater intelligence than the investigators, with 
motivations and concerns beyond the scope of the average 
human’s understanding. Monsters will not automatically seek 
combat and, if they do, they will not necessarily seek to kill 
the investigators. The more intelligent monsters may take the 
investigators captive, either to use as slaves or sacrifices, or 
perhaps for experimental purposes. Not every encounter has 
to be a fight; hiding or fleeing may be the wisest option.
When involved in combat, consider the monster’s 
objective. If its aim is to kill the investigator, it should fight back 
rather than dodge. If it wants to escape from the investigators, 
it may choose to dodge in order to gain an opportunity to flee. 
Many Mythos monsters can use spells, casting them as any 
other spell caster would. In some cases a monster’s spell may 
be portrayed as a manifestation of that monster’s innate power. 
Monsters may not have skills listed, though most or 
all might have a few skills such as Listen, Stealth, or Spot 
Hidden. Keepers should add skills as required, using 
comparative beings as a guide.
Mythos gods and some Mythos monsters are 
multidimensional, existing in our plane of reality as well as 
others beyond our reasoning, and thus cannot be truly slain. 
While hit points are given, should such a creature as an Outer 
God or Great Old One be somehow reduced to 0 or negative 
hit points, the thing is not killed or rendered unconscious, 
but is dispelled or forced back from whence it came. Mere 
damage will not destroy or even harm these powers. If they 
are forced or persuaded to leave, they can return.
Monsters and Investigators—  
a Comparison
It is quite possible for the investigators to beat some monsters in 
combat. Against others, their only chance of survival is generally 
to flee or hide. Deep ones, byakhee, dimensional shamblers, 
fire vampires, ghasts, ghouls, servants of Gla'aki, mi-go, 
moon-beasts, nightgaunts, rat-things, sand-dwellers, serpent 
people, insects from Shagghai, tcho-tcho, and of course human 
cultists can all be "taken on" in combat by several investigators 
with some hope of success. This is the reason that so many 
scenarios feature cultists, deep ones, mi-go, and ghouls—they 
make approximately human-scale adversaries. Such Mythos 
entities can, on first reflection, appear human-like in terms of 
their vulnerability and relative size; yet beware of humanizing 
such monsters. As stated, their goals, knowledge, and abilities 
should be difficult, if not impossible, to fathom. They will act in 
unexpected ways and the mere sight of them can draw madness 
down upon the inquisitive investigator. 
Lovecraft developed unpronounceable 
names for his monsters to drive home 
their alien quality.These are not official, 
but it’s how we say them. 
Entity   Pronunciation
Abhoth  AB-hauth
Atlach-Nacha  AT-lach NACH-ah
Azathoth  AZ-uh-thoth
Bast   BAST
Bokrug   BOE-kruhg
Byakhee  b’YAHK-ee
Chaugnar Faugn SHAHG-ner FAHN
Chthonian kuh-THOEN-ee-un
Cthugha  kuh-THOOG-hah
Cthulhu  kuh-THOO-loo
Cyaegha  sigh-AE-guh
Dagon  DAE-gaun
Daoloth   DAE-oe-lauth
Dhole  DOEL
Eihort  IGH-hort
Ghast   GAST
Ghatanothoa gah-tahn-oe-THOE-ah
Gla'aki   GLAH-ah-kee
Gnoph-Keh nauf-KAE
Hastur  has-TOOR
Hydra  HIGH-drah
Hypnos  HIP-noes
Ithaqua   ITH-uh-kwah
Lloigor  LOI-goer
Mi-Go   MEE-goe
Nodens   NOE-denz
Nyarlathotep NIGH-ar-LAT-hoe-tep
Nyogtha  nee-AUG-thah
Quachil Uttaus  KWAH-chil oo-TAUS
Rhan-Tegoth ran-TEE-gauth
Shaggai   shah-GIGH
Shantak   SHAN-tak
Shoggoth SHOE-gauth
Shub-Niggurath shub-NIG-er-ath
Shudde M’ell  shood-ih-MEL
Tcho-Tcho   Choe-choe
Tindalos  TIN-dah-loes
Tsathoggua   tsah-THAUG-wah
Tulzscha  TUHLZ-chuh
Ubbo Sathla  OO-boe SATH-lah
Xiclotl   ZIGH-klaut’l
Y’golonac  ee-GOE-laun-ahk
Yibb-Tstll  yib-TIS-tuhl
Yig   YIG
Yog-Sothoth  YOG-sau-thauth
Yuggoth  YUG-gauth
Zhar   ZAR
Chaosium Pronunciations of Mythos Names
===== PDF page index 292 (rulebook p.292) =====
281 
chapter 14: monsters , beasts , and alien gods
Combat
By default, every monster (with a few exceptions), has the 
Fighting skill—a generic combat skill covering all manner 
of strikes, kicks, claws, teeth, tentacles, elbows, head butts, 
etc. If the being is able to use melee weapons, the Fighting 
skill should be used for those as well. Be creative in how 
you use and portray these attacks. Each entry describes 
how the monster would normally attack, and key words, 
such as bite or kick, are provided to give Keepers ideas on 
how best to describe differing attacks. The environment can 
also be added to the description of attacks and damage: an 
investigator could be crushed between an elephant and a 
tree; a ghoul could crack open an investigator’s head against 
a gravestone; and so on. 
While a monster’s standard attack could be used every time, 
this can become repetitive and dull. Using the damage listed for 
the monster’s standard Fighting attack frees the Keeper from 
having to adjust the damage with each variation, allowing the 
Keeper greater freedom to describe the monster’s attacks in 
creative and imaginative ways. The Keeper is neither gaining an 
advantage or disadvantage in varying the monster’s attacks—he 
or she is making the story more exciting and engaging.
Monsters and Maneuvers
Maneuvers (mnvr) use the monster’s Fighting skill. Build is 
an important factor for maneuvers; if the opponent is 3 Build 
points above that of an attacker, a maneuver is ineffective. 
Any monster of Build 2 or greater is never going to have 
penalty dice when using a maneuver against a human being. 
The largest opponent a human (maximum Build 2) could 
take on with a maneuver would be Build 4 (horse, elder 
thing, etc.)—even then, the largest of humans would attack 
with 2 penalty dice due to the difference in Build. 
In combat, monsters can use the same range of maneuvers 
open to humans. The Keeper should visualize the monster 
and imagine how it might take advantage of its physical form 
in combat. If it has tentacles, hands, or pincers, it might seize 
hold of its opponent. If it has a prominent mouth then it 
might bite and hold onto its prey. Large creatures might 
A deep one has the following attack listed:
Fighting 45% (22/9), damage 1D6 + damage bonus (1D4)
Using this skill, the Keeper could describe a 
successful attack in any of the following ways. 
Regardless of the manner of attack, for ease of play, 
the same 1D6 + 1D4 damage is dealt.
i The deep one rakes its claws across Harvey’s 
chest, slicing through his clothes.
i The deep one charges into Harvey, body-
slamming him.
i Kicking out backwards like a horse, the deep 
one slams its foot into Harvey’s midriff.
i The deep one grabs Harvey’s jacket, thrusting 
Harvey’s head into the crumbling plaster of 
the wall in the Gilman House Hotel.
A dark young is fighting a group of investigators. 
The dark young may initiate five separate attacks on 
its turn in the DEX order, one of which may be its 
trample attack. 
First attack: The dark young raises one of its 
many hooves to stamp on a hapless investigator. The 
investigator’s player rolls a failure on the attempt to 
dodge the attack, while the Keeper rolls a Regular 
success on the dark young’s Fighting skill, and deals 
damage equal to damage bonus (4D6), for 11 damage. 
Second attack: This time the dark young lashes 
out with a tentacle to attempt to grasp an investigator. 
This uses a fighting maneuver; of course the dark 
young has a larger build than any investigator, so 
does not take any penalty dice on the maneuver. The 
Keeper rolls an Extreme success. The investigator fails 
to dodge and is seized and lifted high in the air, being 
drained of 12 points of Strength. The dark young will 
keep the investigator held until the poor unfortunate 
has been completely drained.
Third attack: Two of the investigators are getting 
into their pickup truck. Remember that the dark young 
has an INT of 70, as much as most investigators, so 
it may well know what a pickup truck is. It uses its 
trample attack on the pickup. At present, the vehicle 
is static and so the Keeper allows an automatic 
success, but makes the attack roll in case of a fumble 
or Extreme success. The attack would normally have 
failed but was not a fumble, so in this case the attack 
against a stationary object is successful. This deals 
(6D6) 17 damage. Each 10 full points of damage 
reduces the build of a vehicle by 1 point. 
Fourth attack: Annoyed at how tough the pickup 
truck proved to be, the Keeper decides that the dark 
young will attempt to flip the vehicle. The pickup has 
a build of 6 (it has 1 point of damage, but its listed 
build is still 6), 1 higher than the dark young’s build; 
the dark young can use its fighting maneuver but 
must apply 1 penalty die. Again, the car is not moving 
so unless the Keeper rolls a fumble, the attack will be 
successful. The Keeper rolls 24 or 14 (with the penalty 
die) which, taking the higher roll, still gives a Hard 
success. Builds (see page 279)  states that a being is 
just able to lift something that is of 1 build larger than 
itself. The dark young manages to tip the pickup truck 
over onto its side, with a crash.
For its final attack the dark young simply lashes 
out with a kick at a nearby investigator, and the 
Keeper rolls a Hard success. The player rolls a Hard 
success to dodge, so the investigator avoids the blow.
===== PDF page index 293 (rulebook p.293) =====
282 
Call of Cthulhu
simply trap their opponents with their bulk, crushing the life 
out of them. Opponents that are seized or grabbed are held 
until they succeed in an opposed STR roll or maneuver of 
their own to free themselves.
With a successful maneuver, a monster could:
i Knock an investigator to the floor, gaining a bonus 
die on its next attack if the investigator is still prone.
i Push an investigator out of a window or over a cliff.
i Disarm an investigator, knocking that annoying 
"boom-stick" out of his or her hands.
i Grasp hold of an investigator with a tentacle, gaining 
a bonus die to cause harm by constriction or pum -
meling the held investigator against a wall on the 
next attack.
i If the monster is large enough, it could seize an 
investigator and carry him or her off next round, 
perhaps flying away or carrying the held investigator 
aloft with a writhing tentacle.
i A standard car has Build 5, so any monster with 
Build 3+ has the potential to damage vehicles. 
Larger monsters might even seize hold of a vehicle 
containing the investigators, much like an angry 
child throwing a cereal box.
Monsters and Fighting Back
Unless a monster is trying to escape or being especially crafty, 
you should respond to investigator attacks by fighting back 
rather than dodging. When fighting back, a monster should 
generally use its basic Fighting skill. A monster that has more 
than one attack per round may also dodge or fight back that 
number of times before its enemies are granted a bonus die 
for outnumbering it (see Outnumbered, page 108). Thus a 
ghoul with three attacks can fight back three times before 
its attackers gain a bonus die to their attacks. Some Mythos 
entities can never be outnumbered by investigators.
Killing Monsters
Rather than declaring that a monster or opponent is dead, 
the Keeper is encouraged to describe what the investigators 
can see—the monster has stopped moving, it appears to be 
melting, a thick green fluid is welling up from a hole in the 
side of its body, and so on. Remember that these monsters are 
strange and alien beings; determining death should not be 
simple. Some monsters (when reduced to unconsciousness 
or zero hit points) may appear to be dead, only to rise again 
moments or hours later to inflict a grisly revenge on their 
attackers. Only a successful First Aid or Medicine roll will 
determine for sure whether a being is alive or dead.
Monster Spells
The higher a monster’s POW and INT, the more likely it is 
to know spells. As a guide, those with POW and INT of 50 
to 100 might know 1D6 spells. In choosing spells, consider 
the purpose and the nature of the creature. Keepers are 
encouraged to manipulate and alter spells to better suit 
particular Mythos monsters. No casting roll is required for 
the initial casting of a spell by a monster. Expend magic 
points as required by the spell cost, but disregard any SAN 
costs or Sanity rolls. 
Suitable spells for each monster are suggested, although 
others may be known if the Keeper wishes.
In many cases, the Mythos monsters described here 
worship one or more of the Outer Gods or Great Old Ones, 
and it should be assumed that they would know at least one 
spell to contact, call, or summon their masters. 
Chapter 12: Grimoire  details many suitable spells, 
however Keepers are encouraged to adjust spells and use the 
deeper magic versions; after all, these beings are not some 
fumbling human wizard seeking the mysteries of magic, but 
rather the very embodiment of the Mythos in all of its horrific 
splendor. 
Section One:  
Mythos Monsters
This section details the abominations of the Cthulhu 
Mythos—creatures of this world and from beyond. The 
monsters described here are, in the main, repugnant to 
humanity in their visage and aspect, being a threat to both 
an investigator’s mind and body.
Keepers are reminded that these embodiments of the 
Mythos are not uniform in their appearance, and distinctions 
can be made between creatures of the same race. 
When portraying a Mythos monster, the Keeper should 
avoid only illustrating the visual aspect to the players. Smell 
and sound are important signifiers, so too is the otherworldly 
atmosphere such creatures create. As the Necronomicon 
states, “ …as a foulness shall ye shall know Them. ” 
Byakhee
There flapped rhythmically a horde of tame, trained, 
hybrid winged things…not altogether crows, nor moles, nor 
buzzards, nor ants, nor decomposed human beings, but 
something I cannot and must not recall.
—H.P . Lovecraft, The Festival
This interstellar race often serves Hastur the Unnamable, 
and may be summoned to partake in rituals. Composed 
of conventional matter, they are vulnerable to ordinary 
weapons, such as pistols. 
Dwelling in interstellar space, byakhee do not have bases 
on Earth, but may be summoned to perform deeds or to 
serve as steeds, carrying riders through interstellar space.
