
===== PDF page index 418 (rulebook p.418) =====
407 
chapter 16: APPENDICES
Summary of  
Game System 
Rules
Making Skill Rolls:
T State a goal before rolling any dice. 
T Determine the difficulty level for the roll.
T Pushing the roll: can the player justify it? Keeper may 
foreshadow consequence of failure.
T Check skills when used successfully.
Critical success: 01.
Fumble: 100 is always a fumble. If the dice roll required for 
success is below 50, a fumble occurs if 96—100 is rolled.
Regular Difficulty Level:  Opposing skill/characteristic is 
below 50, or the task is a standard one. The player needs to roll 
equal to or below his or her full skill or characteristic to succeed.
Hard Difficulty Level: Opposing skill/characteristic is equal 
to or above 50, or the task is exceptionally difficult. The player 
needs to roll equal to or below half his or her skill or charac -
teristic to succeed.
Extreme Difficulty Level:  Opposing skill/characteristic is 
equal to or above 90, or this task is on the borders of human 
capability. The player needs to roll equal to or below a fifth of 
his or her skill or characteristic to succeed.
Opposed Rolls
Use when two players are opposing one another. Both roll 
against agreed skill or characteristic. The one with the best 
level of success wins:
A Critical success beats an Extreme success.
An Extreme success beats a Hard success.
A Hard success beats a Regular success.
A Regular success beats a Failure or Fumble.
In the case of a tie, the side with the higher skill (or charac -
teristic) wins. If still tied either an impasse has been reached 
or both sides should re-roll. Opposed rolls cannot be pushed.
Bonus Dice and Penalty Dice
For each bonus die: roll an additional tens percentile die 
alongside the usual pair of percentile dice when making a skill 
roll (rolling 3 separate dice: one units die and two tens dice). 
Use the tens dice that yields the better (lower) result. 
For each penalty die: roll an additional tens percentage die 
alongside the usual pair of percentage dice (rolling 3 separate 
dice: one units die and two tens dice). Use the tens dice that 
yields the worse (higher) result. 
Human Limits and Skill Rolls
The upper limit of what can be opposed is 100 + the 
investigator’s skill or characteristic.
Starting with the lowest, deduct each investigator’s 
characteristic value in turn from the opposition’s characteristic. 
Continue doing this until the opponent’s characteristic 
has been reduced to a value that can be challenged by an 
investigator. Investigators whose characteristics were not used 
to reduce the opposing factor may now make a skill roll, with 
an Extreme, Hard or Regular difficulty level, as determined 
by the value of the opposing characteristic. The opposition 
cannot be reduced to zero or lower by this method; a skill roll 
is always required.
Combined Skill Rolls
Used when a situation allows or demands the use of more 
than one skill. 
Only one dice roll is made; the result is then compared 
with each of the skills named. The Keeper will specify whether 
a success is required for both skills, or if only one of the skills 
need be successful.
Investigator  
Development Phase
T Roll 1D100 for each skill checked. If the result is high-
er than the skill or over 95, add 1D10 skill points.
T Erase ticks.
T If an increase raises a skill to 90% or more, add 2D6 
Sanity points.
T Check Credit Rating and review finances (see Inves-
tigator Development Phase: Employment and 
Credit Rating, page 96).
T Seek to recover Sanity (see Chapter 7: Sanity).
T Review the investigator’s background (see Altering 
an Investigator’s Backstory, page 95).

===== PDF page index 419 (rulebook p.419) =====
408 
Call of Cthulhu
Summary of  
Melee Combat
1. Establish the order of attack: Rank all characters in DEX 
order—highest goes first.
Surprise attacks: Allow a skill roll to determine whether the 
target anticipates the attack (Spot Hidden, Listen, Psychology). 
If successful, switch to the usual DEX combat order. Otherwise 
the attack automatically hits or gains a bonus die.
2. Each character gets one action: Any action a character can 
make in a combat round—attacking, dodging, fighting back, 
fleeing, casting a spell, etc. Note: some NPCs and monsters 
have multiple actions.
3. Determine the intention of the action: Is the intention to 
cause damage, dodge or perform a maneuver?
4. The target of an attack may fight back, dodge the attack 
or attempt a maneuver of their own.
5. Both sides make a skill roll.
If the character chooses to fight back, use the target’s 
Fighting skill to oppose the attacker’s Fighting skill. 
If the character chooses to dodge, use the target’s Dodge 
skill to oppose the attacker’s Fighting skill.
If the target is neither fighting back nor dodging, refer to 
Striking the first blow (Surprise Attacks) on page 106.
6. Determine who was successful. 
a) Attacking a target that is fighting back: The side with the 
better level of success avoids being harmed, and inflicts damage on 
the opponent. In a draw the character initiating the attack beats the 
character that is fighting back. If both fail, no damage is inflicted.
b) Attacking a target that is dodging: If the attacker gains a 
higher level of success, the attack is successful and the attacker 
inflicts damage on the loser. Otherwise the attack is dodged 
and no damage is dealt. In a draw the character dodging wins 
and evades the attack. If both fail, no damage is inflicted.
Combat rolls cannot be pushed.
7. Roll damage for successful attacks (see Table XVII: 
Weapons, page 401-406, or 1D3 for unarmed human attack). 
If the attacker gains an Extreme level of success (not if fighting 
back) greater damage is inflicted:
If the attacker is using an impaling weapon: maximum 
damage (maximum damage plus maximum damage bonus) 
plus roll weapon damage. 
If the attacker is using a non-impaling weapon (e.g. blunt): 
maximum damage (maximum damage plus maximum damage 
bonus).
Summary of  
Fighting Maneuvers
If the goal is something other than simply inflicting physical 
harm (e.g. disarm), resolve it with a maneuver.
1. Compare Builds of the character performing the ma -
neuver and the target: If attacker is smaller then they take 1 
penalty die for each point of difference in Build. If difference is 
3 or more, the maneuver is impossible.
2. Make the attack roll: Same as for a regular Fighting attack 
(Brawling or appropriate fighting specialization skill). The 
opponent should choose to either dodge or fight back as they 
would for a normal attack:
G If the target is dodging: Roll Fighting skill vs. Dodge 
skill. If the character performing the maneuver 
achieves a higher level of success than the character 
dodging, the maneuver is successful (if tied, the tar -
get is able to dodge the maneuver).
G If the target is fighting back: Roll Fighting skill vs. 
Fighting skill. If the character fighting back achieves 
a higher level of success, the maneuver fails and the 
opponent inflicts damage on the character performing 
the maneuver (if tied, the maneuver is successful). 
G The target of an attack may use a maneuver of their 
own: Resolve as for fighting back, but apply the effect 
of their maneuver instead of inflicting damage.
3. A successful maneuver allows the character to achieve 
one goal (page 105).
Other Combat Situations
Outnumbered
Once a character has either fought back or dodged once in 
the present combat round, all subsequent attacks on them are 
made with one bonus die.
Characters and monsters that have more than one attack 
per round may also dodge or fight back that number of times 
before the bonus die is applied. Note that some Mythos 
entities can never be outnumbered by investigators.
Ranged and Thrown Attacks 
Ranged missile attacks (such as bows) are treated like firearms 
(target has the option of Diving for Cover, see page 113).
Thrown weapons may be opposed with the Dodge skill in the 
same way as Fighting attacks (see Resolving a Fighting Attack 
Made Against a Target that is Dodging, page 103).
===== PDF page index 420 (rulebook p.420) =====
409 
chapter 16: APPENDICES
A character may not choose the option of fighting back 
against a ranged (missile) or thrown weapon attack unless he 
or she is already within close physical proximity to the attacker 
(within a fifth of their DEX in feet).
Half the attacker’s damage bonus is applied to thrown 
weapons and missile weapons which rely directly on the 
user’s strength. Thus this applies to bows and slings but not 
to crossbows.
To resolve a ranged or thrown attack, the Keeper should set 
a difficulty level as for a firearm attack (see Range and Firearms 
Difficulty Levels, page 112).
Escaping Close Combat
On their turn in the order of combat, providing a character has 
an escape route and is not physically restrained, their action 
can be used to flee melee combat. 
Armor 
Armor reduces the damage received: deduct the number of 
armor points from the damage.
Summary of  
Firearms Combat
To resolve a firearms attack, make a 1D100 roll and compare 
the result with the attacker’s Firearms skill (using the 
appropriate specialization). The firearms roll is not opposed. 
The difficulty level is determined by the range, with various 
other factors granting either penalty or bonus dice. A failure 
never deals damage.
Readied Firearms: Shoot at DEX + 50.
Firearms  
Difficulty Levels
The difficulty level of a firearms skill roll is always set according 
to range. 
G Within base range: Regular difficulty level.
G Long range (up to twice base range): Hard difficulty 
level.
G Very long range (up to four times base range): Ex -
treme difficulty level.
Any further modifiers use bonus or penalty dice.
Note: At very long range, when only an Extreme success 
will hit the target, an impale only occurs with a critical hit (a 
roll of 01).
Firearm Modifiers
Once the difficulty level of a firearms attack has been set, all 
other factors that lend a distinct advantage or disadvantage 
are taken into account.
 
G Target is diving for cover (Dodge roll success): one 
penalty die.
G Target is partially concealed: one penalty die.
G Point-blank range (within fifth DEX in feet): one 
bonus die.
G Aiming (for one round): one bonus die.
G Fast-moving target (MOV 8+): one penalty die.
G Target is small (Build –2): one penalty die.
G Target is large (Build 4+): one bonus die.
G Loading 1 bullet and shooting in same round: one 
penalty die.
G Firing 2+ shots from a handgun in one round: one 
penalty die on all shots.
G Firing into melee: one penalty die.
Aiming: Must be declared on the character’s turn in the order 
of combat. The shot is taken on the same turn in the order of 
combat on the following round. If the aiming character takes 
damage or moves while aiming, the advantage of aiming is lost. 
Firing into melee combat:  A fumble indicates an ally has 
been hit. If multiple allies are in the line of fire, the one with 
the lowest Luck score is hit.
Armor Examples:
Heavy leather jacket 1 point
WWI helmet 2 points
1" Hardwood 3 points
Present U.S. Helmet 5 points
Heavy Kevlar Vest 8 points
Military Body Armor 12 points
1.5" bulletproof glass 15 points
1" Steel plate 19 points
Large sand bag 20 points
===== PDF page index 421 (rulebook p.421) =====
410 
Call of Cthulhu
Reloading Firearms: One combat round to load two shells 
into any handgun, rifle or shotgun. Allow one round to 
exchange a clip. Allow two rounds to change a machine gun 
belt.
Full Auto/ Burst Fire
Player declares the number of bullets to be fired before rolling 
dice. Full auto fire is divided into a number of volleys; each 
volley requires a skill roll. Divide firer’s skill by 10 (round down) 
to determine how many bullets are in a volley (regardless of 
skill, a volley is never less than 3 bullets). The attacker must 
make a fresh attack roll for each volley of shots or whenever 
they select a new target. Burst fire is a single skill roll (a single 
volley).
Ammunition is expended when moving between targets 
(one bullet per meter/yard).
Rolling to Hit with Full Auto/Burst Fire:
First attack roll:  set difficulty by range and then apply any 
modifiers.
Second and further attack rolls: add one penalty die (or re-
move a bonus die) for each additional attack roll. If this would 
incur three penalty dice, stick with two penalty dice and raise 
the difficulty level by one step.
Resolving each attack roll:
G If the attack roll is successful: half of the shots 
fired hit the target—roll damage for half of the shots 
(round down, minimum of one). Subtract any armor 
from each shot.
G  If the attack is an Extreme success:  all shots fired 
hit the target, the first half (round down, minimum of 
one) of which impale. Subtract any armor from each 
shot. If the difficulty level of the shot was Extreme, 
the best possible result is a successful hit and not an 
impale. 
Malfunctions: Any attack roll result equal to or higher than 
the firing weapon’s malfunction number indicates that the 
weapon malfunctions and does not fire.
A Summary of  
Firearms Modifiers: Bonus 
and Penalty dice
Difficulty Level Bonus Die Penalty Die
Regular: Normal 
range
Aiming for 1 round Target diving for 
cover
Hard: Long range Point blank Fast-moving target 
(MOV 8+)
Extreme: Very long 
range
Large target (Build 4+) Partial (50%+) 
concealment
Small target (Build –2)
Multiple handgun 
shots
Loading and firing 
one shot in a single 
round
Firing into melee
===== PDF page index 422 (rulebook p.422) =====
411 
chapter 16: APPENDICES
Table III:  
Other Forms of Damage
*Asphyxiation and drowning: a CON roll should be made each round; once a CON roll is failed, damage is sustained each 
round thereafter until death or until the victim is able to breathe. If the character is in a state of physical exertion, a Hard success 
is required on the CON roll. Death occurs at zero hit points (ignore the Major Wound rule).
**Poisons: a roll equal to or less than one-fifth of CON will halve damage from poisons. Poisons may cause a variety 
of additional symptoms including: stomach pains, vomiting, diarrhea, chills, sweats, cramps, jaundice, altered heart rate, 
impaired vision, convulsions, unconsciousness and paralysis. It is up to the Keeper whether the symptoms permit the victim 
to act or not, or to act with a penalty die or an increased level of difficulty.
In certain circumstances, Keepers may allow a poison's effects to be shaken off if the CON roll is a critical success.
Injury Damage Examples
Minor: a person could survive 
numerous occurrences of this level 
of damage.
1D3 Punch, kick, head-butt, mild acid, breathing smoky atmosphere*, a 
thrown fist-size rock, falling (per 10 feet) onto soft swamp.
Moderate: might cause a major 
wound; it would take a few such 
attacks to kill.
1D6
Falling (per 10 feet) onto grass, club, strong acid, breathing water*, 
exposure to vacuum*, small caliber bullet, arrow,  
fire (burning torch).
Severe: likely to cause a major 
wound. One or two occurrences 
would render a person 
unconscious or dead.
1D10
.38 caliber bullet, falling (per 10 feet) onto concrete, axe, fire 
(flamethrower, running through a burning room), being 6 to 9 
yards from an exploding hand grenade or stick of dynamite,  
a mild poison**.
Deadly: the average person has a 
50% chance of dying. 2D10 Hit by a car at 30mph, being 3 to 6 yards from an exploding hand 
grenade or stick of dynamite, a strong poison**.
Terminal: outright death is likely. 4D10 Hit by a speeding car, being within 3 yards of an exploding hand 
grenade or stick of dynamite, a lethal poison**.
Splat: outright death almost 
certain. 8D10 Being involved in a high-speed head-on collision,  
being hit by a train.

===== PDF page index 423 (rulebook p.423) =====
412 
Call of Cthulhu

===== PDF page index 424 (rulebook p.424) =====
413 
chapter 16: APPENDICES

===== PDF page index 425 (rulebook p.425) =====
414 
Call of Cthulhu
Summary of  
Chase Rules
Establishing the Chase
Decide whether fleeing characters/vehicles are heading in 
same direction or splitting up. If splitting up, decide which 
pursuers are chasing which characters/vehicles. If you have 
multiple groups, treat each one as a separate chase.
Speed roll: All participants make a skill roll: CON (if on foot 
or other self-propelled mode) or Drive Auto (for vehicles). 
G If passed: MOV remains unchanged. 
G If an Extreme success: MOV +1. 
G If failed: MOV –1.
Order each group separately in order of MOV.
Fleeing characters/vehicles with a speed greater than any 
of their pursuers may escape completely. 
Pursuers with a speed that is lower than the slowest fleeing 
character are completely out of the chase. 
Cut to the Chase 
Place the pursuers:  Place pursuers in order, slowest at the 
rear, others a number of locations ahead equal to their differ -
ence in MOV.
Place the fleeing characters:  Place the fleeing characters/
vehicles in order, slowest at the rear (2 locations ahead of the 
lead pursuer), others a number of locations ahead equal to 
their difference in MOV.
Position hazards and barriers.
Allocate each participant a number of movement ac -
tions: Every character and vehicle gets one movement action 
by default. To this is added the difference between their move-
ment rating (MOV) and the movement rating of the slowest 
participant in the chase.
Determine DEX order
Hazards: Make a skill roll to move through a hazard. If the 
skill roll is failed, the Keeper may inflict damage (see Table III: 
Other Forms of Damage, page 411, or Table VI: Vehicular 
Collisions, opposite) and delay (1D3 movement actions).
Cautious approach to hazards:  1 or 2 movement actions 
may be spent to buy 1 or 2 bonus dice for the skill roll to 
negotiate a hazard.
Barrier: Either a barrier must be broken down or a skill roll 
must also be made before a character/vehicle can move onto 
the next location. If appropriate, the Keeper may wish to 
inflict damage and delay as for a hazard.
Breaking down barriers:  Vehicles inflict 1D10 damage for 
each point of their Build. If a vehicle attacks a barrier and fails 
to destroy it, the vehicle is wrecked. If the barrier is destroyed, 
the vehicle suffers an amount of damage equal to half the 
barrier’s hit points prior to impact.
G Internal door or thin wooden fence: 5 hit points.
G Standard back door: 10 hit points.
G Strong domestic external door: 15 hit points.
G 9” brick wall: 25 hit points.
G Mature tree: 50 hit points.
G Concrete bridge support: 100 hit points.
Attacks: Cost 1 movement action to initiate (except if 
ranged). Resolve as regular combat. 
Vehicles in combat: Substitute Drive Auto for both Fighting 
and Dodge skills. A vehicle can be used as a weapon (1D10 
damage per listed build point). Whenever a vehicle is used to 
inflict damage it also suffers an amount of damage equal to 
half (round down) that which it delivers, but never enough 
to cause it to lose a greater amount of build points than the 
thing which it hit originally possessed. Each full 10 hit points 
of damage decreases a vehicle’s build by one point (round 
down); damage below 10 points is ignored.
Random locations: Roll 1D100:
 01-59 = 1 open location
 60+ = 1 Regular hazard
 85+ = 1 Hard hazard 
 96+ = 1 Extreme hazard 
Environment is especially hazardous: add a penalty die.
Environment is unlikely to have any dangers or delays:  
add a bonus die.
Sudden hazards: Once per round there is the option to call 
for a group Luck roll. Winner (Keeper or players) gets to place 
a regular hazard where they wish. Keeper and players must 
alternate in who calls for a sudden hazard.
MOV 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
MPH 3 4 6 8 12 18 27 40
MOV 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
MPH 60 90 135 200 300 450 675 1000
===== PDF page index 426 (rulebook p.426) =====
415 
chapter 16: APPENDICES
Pedal to the Metal
A driver can elect to move 2 or 3 locations 
with one movement action. Any hazards 
encountered have one penalty die applied to 
the skill rolls.
A driver can elect to move 4 or 5 
locations with one movement action. Any 
hazards encountered have two penalty dice 
applied to the skill rolls.
One passenger can assist the driver with 
navigation and spotting ways to negotiate 
hazards. With a successful Spot Hidden or 
Navigate roll, on the vehicle’s next move, 
the vehicle can accelerate once with 1 fewer 
penalty die.
Firearms: Penalty die while moving. No 
penalty die if remaining stationary and 
spending 1 movement action.
Tires: Penalty die to target tires. Armor:3. 
Hit points: 2 (only damaged by impaling 
weapons). Destroying a tire reduces vehicle 
Build by 1.
Driver damage: If the driver of a moving 
vehicle takes a major wound he or she may 
lose control of their vehicle and must roll 
immediately as for a Hazard at Hard diffi -
culty level.
Switching between being running and 
driving: Make a fresh speed roll. Recalculate 
movement actions. 
Monsters in Chases
Where the monster or non-player character 
has an implied aptitude, use their DEX in place of 
the skill.
Where the monster or non-player character has 
an implied ineptitude, use one-fifth of their DEX in 
place of the skill (or simply rule the attempt to be an 
automatic failure).
Where the monster or non-player character has 
neither implied aptitude nor ineptitude, use half of 
their DEX in place of the skill.
If other skills are required, the Keeper might use a 
similar approach, using what he or she feels to be the 
most appropriate characteristic from which to derive 
skill values.
Table VI: Vehicular Collisions
Incident Damage Examples
Minor incident: 
Most Regular 
Hazards. May be 
cosmetic damage 
only, possibly 
something serious.
1D3–1 
Build
Glancing blow from another 
vehicle, grazing a lamp post, 
hitting a post, colliding with 
person or similar-sized creature.
Moderate incident: 
Most Hard Hazards. 
Might cause major 
damage. Might 
wreck a car. .
1D6 
Build 
Hitting a cow or large deer, 
collision with a heavy motorbike 
or economy car.
Severe incident: 
Most Extreme 
Hazards. Likely 
to wreck a car 
outright.
1D10 
Build
Collision with a standard car, 
lamp post or tree.
Mayhem: Likely 
to wreck a truck 
outright. Almost 
certain to wreck a 
car.
2D10 
Build
Collision with a truck or coach 
or a mature tree.
Road kill: Most 
vehicles will be little 
more than scattered 
debris.
5D10 
Build
Collision with a juggernaut or a 
train, hit by a meteor.
Summary: Five Steps to 
Setting Up a Chase
To sum up, there are five steps for the Keeper to 
perform when setting up a chase:
G Place the pursuer.
G Place the fleeing character.
G Position hazards and barriers.
G Allocate each participant a number of move -
ment actions.
G Determine DEX order.

===== PDF page index 427 (rulebook p.427) =====
416 
Call of Cthulhu
Table V: Vehicle Reference Charts
The following vehicles use the Drive Auto skill.
Vehicles on the following chart require specialist training to 
operate; the skill Operate Heavy Machinery might be substituted. 
Vehicles on the following chart use the Pilot skill. Many require a 
substantial crew. The armor value is for those on deck.
Vehicles on the following chart use the Pilot skill. Many require 
a substantial crew.
Vehicles on the following chart use the Ride skill. 
Key
MOV: A rating of the vehicle’s speed and maneuverability 
in chases. These ratings are for modern vehicles and may be 
reduced by around 20% for 1920s vehicles (though there were 
cars in the 1920s that could exceed 100 MPH). 
Build: A rating of the strength and size of the vehicle. When 
reduced to zero, the vehicle is out of action. Each full 10 hit 
points of damage decreases a vehicle’s build by 1 point (round 
down); damage below 10 hit points is ignored.
If a vehicle’s build is reduced to half (round down) of its 
starting value or lower, it is impaired; one penalty die is applied 
to all Drive Auto (or appropriate skill) rolls.
If a vehicle takes damage equal to its full build value in one 
incident, the vehicle is completely wrecked in an impressive 
manner. It may explode, burn, roll or suffer some combination 
thereof. All occupants of the vehicle are likely to die. Whether or 
not investigators have a chance of survival is up to the Keeper: 
Luck rolls may be allowed. Those who are fortunate get thrown 
free, though it is recommended they take at least 2D10 damage. 
If a vehicle’s build is otherwise reduced to zero by 
cumulative damage (i.e. in increments of less than the vehicle’s 
starting build value), it becomes undriveable, grinding to a halt. 
Depending on the situation (and perhaps a Luck roll) this may 
lead to an accident resulting in 1D10 damage for the driver and 
each passenger. 
Armor for people: The armor rating is for the passengers and 
driver, reflecting the number of points of armor the vehicle 
provides against external attacks.
Passengers and crew: The number of people that can be 
accommodated.
Vehicle MOV Build Armor 
for people
Passengers
Car, economy 13 4 1 3 or 4
Car, standard 14 5 2 4
Car, deluxe 15 6 2 4
Sports car 16 5 2 1
Pickup truck 14 6 2 2+
6-ton truck 13 7 2 2+
18-wheeler 13 9 2 3+
Motorcycle, light 13 1 0 1
Motorcycle, 
heavy
16 3 0 1
Air Vehicles MOV Build Armor for 
people
Passengers
Dirigible 12 10 2 112+
Propeller plane 15 5 1 4+
Bomber plane 17 11 2 10+
Jet plane 18 11 3 50+
Helicopter 15 5 2 15+
Other forms of 
transport
MOV Build Armor for 
people
Passengers
Horse (with 
rider)
11 4 0 1
4-horse carriage 10 3 0 6+
Bicycle 10 0.5 0 1
Heavy 
Vehicles
MOV Build Armor for 
people
Passengers
Tank 11 20 24 4
Steam train 12 12 1 400+
Modern train 15 14 2 400+
Water Vehicles MOV Build Armor for 
people
Passengers
Row boat 4 2 0 3
Hovercraft 12 4 0 22
Motorboat 14 3 0 6
Cruise ship 11 32 0 2200+
Battleship 11 65 0 1800+
Aircraft carrier 11 75 0 3200+
Submarine 12 24 0 120+
===== PDF page index 428 (rulebook p.428) =====
417 
chapter 16: APPENDICES
Summary of  
Sanity Rules
Failing a Sanity roll: one involuntary action.
Sanity loss of 5 points or more: make an Intelligence roll—if 
successful, temporary insanity ensues.
Sanity loss of one-fifth or more in one day:  indefinite 
insanity ensues.
The Phases of Insanity
A bout of madness:  either "real time" (1D10 rounds) or 
"summary" (1D10 hours); Keeper amends one backstory 
detail (phobia, mania, etc.)
Underlying Insanity:  any further Sanity loss results in 
another bout of madness; the investigator is prone to 
delusions.
The Side-Effects of Insanity
1. Phobias: while insane, must fight/flee or take a penalty die 
on skill rolls.
2. Manias: while insane, must submit to mania or take a 
penalty die on skill rolls.
3. Delusions and Reality Checks: make a Sanity roll to test 
for delusions:
 Failure:  lose 1 Sanity point (and undergo a bout of  
 madness if insane).
 Success: dismiss delusions.
4. Insanity and the Cthulhu Mythos:  add 5% Cthulhu 
Mythos skill with first bout of madness inspired by a Mythos-
related event. Add 1% on subsequent occasions.
Recovery
From temporary insanity: after 1D10 hours or a good rest.
From indefinite insanity: roll at the end of each month of 
treatment; Keeper may allow automatic recovery during the 
next investigator development phase.
Treatment with private/home care (roll 1D100 per month): 
01–95: success (or under psychoanalysis skill); add 1D3 
Sanity points. Make a Sanity roll—if successful, insanity is 
cured.
96–100: failure; lose 1D6 Sanity points.
Treatment at institution (roll 1D100 per month): 
01–50: success (or under Psychoanalysis skill); add 1D3 
Sanity points. Make a Sanity roll—if successful, insanity is 
cured.
51-95: no progress.
96–100: failure; lose 1D6 Sanity points. 
Getting Used to the Awfulness
The player records the cumulative Sanity points lost to a given 
Mythos entity (e.g. deep ones); the cumulative loss should 
not exceed the maximum amount for a single encounter with 
that entity. Lower the recorded cumulative loss by 1 with each 
investigator development phase.

===== PDF page index 429 (rulebook p.429) =====
418 
Call of Cthulhu
Table VII: 
Bouts of Madness—Real Time (roll 1D10):
1) Amnesia: The investigator has no memory of events that have taken place since they were last in a place of safety. For example, it seems 
to them that one moment they were eating breakfast and the next they are facing a monster. This lasts for 1D10 rounds.
2) Psychosomatic disability: The investigator suffers psychosomatic blindness, deafness, or loss of the use of a limb or limbs for 1D10 rounds.
3) Violence: A red mist descends on the investigator and they explode in a spree of uncontrolled violence and destruction directed at their 
surroundings, allies or foes alike for 1D10 rounds. 
4) Paranoia: The investigator suffers severe paranoia for 1D10 rounds; everyone is out to get them; no one can be trusted; they are being spied 
on; someone has betrayed them; what they are seeing is a trick.
5) Significant Person: Review the investigator’s backstory entry for Significant People. The investigator mistakes another person in the 
scene for their Significant Person. Consider the nature of the relationship; the investigator acts upon it. This lasts 1D10 rounds. 
6) Faint: The investigator faints. They recover after 1D10 rounds.
7) Flee in panic: The investigator is compelled to get as far away as possible by whatever means are available, even if it means taking the only 
vehicle and leaving everyone else behind. They travel for 1D10 rounds.
8) Physical hysterics or emotional outburst: The investigator is incapacitated from laughing, crying, screaming, etc. for 1D10 rounds.
9) Phobia: Investigator gains a new phobia. Roll 1D100 on Table IX: Sample Phobias (page 160), or the Keeper may choose one. Even if 
the source of the phobia is not present, the investigator imagines it is there for the next 1D10 rounds.
10) Mania: The investigator gains a new mania. Roll 1D100 on Table X: Sample Manias (page 161), or the Keeper may choose one. The 
investigator seeks to indulge in their new mania for the next 1D10 rounds.
Table VIII: 
Bouts of Madness—Summary (roll 1D10):
1) Amnesia: The investigator comes to their senses in some unfamiliar place with no memory of who they are. Their memories will slowly 
return to them over time.
2) Robbed: The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later, having been robbed. They are unharmed. If they were carrying a 
Treasured Possession (see investigator backstory), make a Luck roll to see if it was stolen. Everything else of value is automatically missing.
3) Battered: The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later to find themselves battered and bruised. Hit points are reduced to 
half of what they were before going insane, though this does not cause a Major wound. They have not been robbed. How the damage was 
sustained is up to the Keeper.
4) Violence: The investigator explodes in a spree of violence and destruction. When the investigator comes to their senses, their actions 
may or may not be apparent or remembered. Who or what the investigator has inflicted violence upon and whether they have killed or 
simply inflicted harm is up to the Keeper.
5) Ideology/Beliefs: Review the investigator’s backstory entry for Ideology and Beliefs. The investigator manifests one of these in an extreme, 
crazed and demonstrative manner. For example, a religious person might be found later, preaching the gospel loudly on the subway.
6) Significant People: Consult the investigator’s backstory entry for Significant People and why the relationship is so important. In the time 
that passes (1D10 hours or more) the investigator has done their best to get close to that person and act upon their relationship in some way.
7) Institutionalized: The investigator comes to their senses in a psychiatric ward or police cell. They may slowly recall the events that 
led them there.
8) Flee in panic: When the investigator comes to their senses they are far away, perhaps lost in the wilderness or on a train or long-distance bus.
9) Phobia: The investigator gains a new phobia. Roll 1D100 on Table IX: Sample Phobias (page 160), or the Keeper may choose one. 
The investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later, having taken every precaution to avoid their new phobia.
10) Mania: The investigator gains a new mania. Roll 1D100 on Table X: Sample Manias (page 161), or the Keeper may choose one. The 
investigator comes to their senses 1D10 hours later. During this bout of madness, the investigator will have been fully indulging in their new 
mania. Whether this is apparent to other people is up to the Keeper and player.

===== PDF page index 430 (rulebook p.430) =====
419 
chapter 16: APPENDICES
Summary of 
 Magic Rules
Initial reading of a tome: may require reading roll; variable 
duration (hours to weeks at the Keeper’s discretion); results in 
Sanity point loss (if a believer); reader gains Cthulhu Mythos 
skill points as noted in the tome description.
Reading Roll:
Printed within the last century and in good condition:  
Regular difficulty.
Handwritten (especially if old): Hard difficulty level.
Most challenging of ancient, moldering tomes:  Extreme 
difficulty level.
Full study of a tome:  an initial reading must first be com -
pleted; no reading roll required; see Table XI: Mythos Tomes  
(page 237) for study time; results in Sanity point loss (if a 
believer); if the tome’s Mythos rating is greater than the read-
er’s Cthulhu Mythos skill, the reader gains the full Cthulhu 
Mythos benefit; if Cthulhu Mythos skill is greater than tome’s 
Mythos rating, the reader gains only the initial reading value; 
each subsequent full study doubles in study time. 
For details of tomes see Chapter 11: Tomes of Eldritch Lore.
Initial reading: Reading roll may be required. Keeper decides 
on time required. Roll for Sanity loss and increase Cthulhu 
Mythos skill by tome's CMI value.
Using a tome as a reference book:  must have completed 
a full study; 1D4 hours; roll less than or equal to the book’s 
Cthulhu Mythos Rating. 
Magic points, overspending:  take additional Magic points 
from hit points.
Magic points, recovery:  1 Magic point per hour (more if 
POW is over 100).
Learning a spell from a Mythos book:  complete an Initial 
reading; variable duration (hours to weeks at Keeper’s discre -
tion, typically 2D6 weeks); make a Hard INT roll (optional).
Learning a spell from another person: as from a book, but faster.
Learning a spell from a Mythos entity:  very fast; INT roll 
to retain spell.
Initial casting of a spell: make a Hard POW roll; either Push 
or fully relearn spell; failing the Pushed roll allows the spell 
to be cast but costs 1D6 x MP and Sanity points, and incurs 
other side-effects.
Casting time and spells in combat (see Chapter 12: 
Grimoire): instantaneous—on the user’s DEX+50; one 
round—it activates on the user’s DEX in the present round; 
two rounds—it activates in the following round on the user’s 
DEX, and so on.
Believer: while a nonbeliever, gain Cthulhu Mythos skill but 
do not lose Sanity points for reading tomes; with first loss of 
Sanity points to direct experience of the Cthulhu Mythos, also 
lose Sanity points equal to Cthulhu Mythos skill.
Increasing POW 
A spell requiring an opposed POW roll to affect a target is 
successfully cast (the opposed roll is won)—roll 1D100; if 
greater than POW (or roll 96 or greater), POW increases by 
1D10 points permanently.
A Luck roll result of 01—roll 1D100; if greater than POW (or 
roll 96 or greater), POW increases by 1D10 points permanently.

===== PDF page index 431 (rulebook p.431) =====
420 
Call of Cthulhu
Find the characteristic or skill value under the Base Number column, and read across to determine the half (Hard) and fifth 
(Extreme) values.
Quick Reference Chart for Half and Fifth V alues
Base 
Number
Half 
Value 
(½)
Fifth 
Value 
(1/5)
Base 
Number
Half 
Value 
(½)
Fifth 
Value 
(1/5)
Base 
Number
Half 
Value 
(½)
Fifth 
Value 
(1/5)
Base 
Number
Half 
Value 
(½)
Fifth 
Value 
(1/5)
1 0
0
26
13
5
51 25
10
76
38
15
2
1
27 52
26
77
3 28
14
53 78
39
4
2
29 54
27
79
5
1 
30
15
6
55
11
80
40
16
6
3
31 56
28
81
7 32
16
57 82
41
8
4
33 58
29
83
9 34
17
59 84
42
10
5
2
35
7
60
30
12
85
17
11 36
18
61 86
43
12
6
37 62
31
87
13 38
19
63 88
44
14
7
39 64
32
89
15
3
40
20
8
65
13
90
45
18
16
8
41 66
33
91
17 42
21
67 92
46
18
9
43 68
34
93
19 44
22
69 94
47
20
10
4
45
9
70
35
14
95
19
21 46
23
71 96
48
22
11
47 72
36
97
23 48
24
73 98
49
24
12
49 74
37
99
25 5 50 25 10 75 15 100 50 20
===== PDF page index 432 (rulebook p.432) =====
421 
chapter 16: APPENDICES
Eldritch Words
H.P . Lovecraft was known for his use of unusual words, 
which lent his writing a particular flavor. Y ou may find 
the following list of Lovecraftian words useful and 
inspirational in play. 
A word of caution—reading the entire list causes 
1D3 sanity loss!
Aberrant, Abnormal, Abominable, Absurd, Abysmal, 
Accursed, Acidic, Adhesive, Airy, Alien, Ambiguous, 
Amorphous, Anarchic, Ancient, Angular, Animalistic, 
Animated, Anomalous, Antediluvian, Antiquarian, 
Appalling, Appendaged, Ashen, Askew, Astounding, 
Atrocious, Awry, Baboon-Like, Baleful, Baneful, 
Bankrupt, Barbarous, Batrachian, Beastly, Bellowing, 
Bilious, Bizarre, Blasphemous, Bleating, Bloated, 
Bloodshot, Blubbery, Boiling, Brutish, Bug-eyed, 
Bulbous, Cackling, Cadaverous, Cancerous, Cellular, 
Changeable, Chaotic, Charnel, Chattering, Chitinous, 
Coarse, Colorless, Colossal, Confusing, Congealed, 
Conical, Convoluted, Corpselike, Corpulent, Corrupt, 
Creamy, Criminal, Croaking, Crustaceous, Crystalline, 
Cyclopean, Cylindrical, Daemonic, Dank, Dark, 
Dazzling, Deafening, Deathless, Debased, Debauched, 
Decadent, Decomposing, Deformed, Degenerate, 
Degraded, Delirious, Depraved, Deranged, Detestable, 
Deviant, Diabolical, Diffuse, Dire, Discordant, Diseased, 
Disfigured, Disgusting, Dislocated, Disordered, 
Disproportionate, Dissolved, Distorted, Dreadful, 
Dripping, Effervescent, Effulgence, Effusive, Elastic, 
Eldritch, Elephantine, Endless, Enlarged, Enormous, 
Enveloping, Evasive, Exaggerated, Excruciating, 
Extended, Fabulous, Faceless, Fantastic, Fearful, Fecund, 
Festering, Fibrous, Fiendish, Fiery, Filthy, Fishlike, 
Flabby, Flowing, Fluctuating, Fluid, Foaming, Fetid, 
Foul, Fractured, Fragrant, Frantic, Fungous, Fungoid, 
Furious, Furtive, Gambrel, Gangrenous, Gargantuan, 
Gaunt, Ghastly, Ghoulish, Gibbering, Gibbous, 
Gigantic, Globular, Glutinous, Gluttonous, Gnashing, 
Gory, Grasping, Greenish, Grim, Grisly, Gross, 
Grotesque, Gushing, Hairy, Hallucinatory, Hapless, 
Hateful, Hazy, Heaving, Hellish, Hideous, Hissing, 
Horned, Horrible, Howling, Huge, Hybrid, Ichorous, 
Idiotic, Illogical, Immaterial, Immemorial, Immense, 
Immoral, Indescribable, Incoherent, Incomplete, 
Incongruous, Incredible, Indistinct, Infected, Infernal, 
Infested, Inhuman, Insane, Insipid, Iridescent, 
Irrational, Irregular, Jabbering, Jaded, Jangling, 
Jaundiced, Jellified, Jumbled, Jutting, Kleptomaniacal, 
Leprous, Limp, Liquefied, Loathsome, Lumbering, 
Luminescent, Lumpy, Lunatic, Lurking, Mad, Maggoty, 
Malevolent, Malformed, Malicious, Malignant, Massive, 
Membranous, Menacing, Mesmerizing, Metallic, 
Mildewed, Mindless, Miscarried, Misshapen, Moaning, 
Molten, Monstrous, Monumental, Morbid, Mortifying, 
Mottled, Moldering, Mucky, Mucous, Murmuring, 
Mutilated, Nagging, Nameless, Nauseous, Nearsighted, 
Nebulous, Necromantic, Necrotic, Nightmarish, 
Noiseless, Noisome, Non-Euclidian, Nonsensical, 
Noxious, Numbing, Obscene, Obsequious, Octopoid, 
Odious, Odorous, Oily, Ominous, Oozing, Organic, 
Outlandish, Outré, Oval, Overgrown, Overripe, Pagan, 
Pale, Pallid, Palpitating, Palsied, Parasitic, Pasty, Peculiar, 
Perfidious, Perverse, Phlegmatic, Pitiless, Plastic, Pliable, 
Poisonous, Porous, Pregnant, Prodigious, Profane, 
Profuse, Pronged, Protoplasmic, Protuberant, Prurient, 
Pseudopoidal, Puckered, Pudding-Like, Pulsating, 
Pustular, Putrid, Quavering, Queasy, Quiescent, 
Quivering, Radiant, Rainbowed, Rectangular, Reeking, 
Remorseless, Repellent, Reprehensible, Reptilian, 
Repugnant, Repulsive, Resplendent, Restless, Rheumy, 
Rigid, Rotten, Rotting, Rough, Rubbery, Rugose, 
Sacrilegious, Sallow, Sanguine, Scabby, Scaly, Screaming, 
Scummy, Seething, Senseless, Sepulchral, Shadowy, 
Shiny, Shrieking, Shuffling, Shunned, Sickly, Sightless, 
Sinewy, Singular, Skeletal, Sleepless, Slimy, Slippery, 
Slithering, Slobbering, Sluggish, Solemn, Sordid, 
Soundless, Spectral, Spherical, Sponge-Like, Squamous, 
Stagnant, Stench, Sticky, Stupefying, Stupendous, 
Stygian, Sulphurous, Syrupy, Teeming, Tenebrous, 
Tentacled, Terrible, Thickening, Thrashing, Throbbing, 
Transformed, Transparent, Tubular, Tumultuous, 
Turbid, Turbulent, Ugly, Ultimate, Ululating, Unclean, 
Uncouth, Undigested, Ungainly, Unknown, Unmasked, 
Unmentionable, Unnamable, Unnatural, Unripe, 
Unseen, Unspeakable, Unutterable, Vague, Vaporous, 
Vast, Vibrating, Vile, Viperous, Viscous, Vivid, 
Voluminous, Vomiting, Wailing, Wan, Warped, Waxen, 
Webbed, Wet, Whirling, Withered, Worm-eaten, 
Wormy, Wretched, Writhing, Xenophobic, Y ammering, 
Zodiacal, Zymotic.
